IU-KIAO-LI
OR, THE
TWO FAIR COUSINS.
CHAPTER I.
A LEARNED YOUNG LADY COMPOSES VERSES IN
PLACE OF HER FATHER.
" The human heart is the great fountain from which our classic
works are drawn. Their satires and invectives owe everything to the
charms of style. The world is the great stage of one long drama, and
our contentions make up the scenes thereof."
IT is related that, in the reign of Universal Honesty *,
there was a learned man who filled a great post in
the magistracy. His family name was Pe, his sir-
name Hiouan, and his name of rank Thaihiouan.
He was of the race of Kinling or Nankin, and lived
at the time when the eunuch Wangtchin had in
2
JU-KIAO-LI :
some measure usurped the imperial authority *
Pe, unwilling to be a party to such an outrage,
threw up his office and retired to his native
country.
Pe had no brothers, but he had an only sister,
who was younger than himself. She had been
married to an officer named Lo, who carried her
into the distant province of Chantoung ; so that
Pe now saw himself solitary, without family, and
altogether an isolated being. He gave himself up
to ease, and was moderate in his desires. Caring
as little for fame as for emolument, he disliked
society, and the only gratifications for which he
shewed any relish were those which wine and poetry
afforded. Averse from the world and its business,
he led a retired life in a village called Kinchi, sixty
or seventy miles from the city t. This village was
protected on every side by verdant rising grounds,
and from east to west it was traversed by a winding
stream, whose banks were adorned with the willow
and the peach-tree. Here were seen united, in
happy effect, the beauties of water and mountain
scenery.
The village consisted of about a thousand houses
but of those belonging to the higher order of in-
habitants the mansion of Pe was beyond doubt the
most considerable. Having discharged high offices,
and being possessed of vast property, he enjoyed
an excellent reputation as a literary as well as an
official character. One thing only nearly concerned
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
3
him ; he had attained his fortieth year, and was
without a son ; not that he had refused to enrol
amongst his household females of the second rank.
He retained them five or six years, in the hope of
having a family; and at the end of that time, his
wishes being disappointed, he dismissed them.
Strange enough, these women no sooner contracted
new matrimonial engagements, than at the termina-
tion of a year they blessed their husbands with
issue. Pe with sighs resigned himself to what he
thought the decree of providence, and resolved to
take no more wives from the second rank of females.
His first wife, who belonged to the family of Gou,
went about everywhere addressing prayers to the
gods, offering adoration to the genii, burning per-
fumes, and tendering vows. In short, she had at-
tained her forty-fourth year, when she brought forth
a daughter. The night of her birth, Pe thought he
beheld, during a dream, a divine personage, who
presented him with a portion of jasper of the deepest
red, and brilliant as the sun. It was on this ac-
count he gave to his daughter the name of Houngiu.
Though Pe and his wife were mortified that at
their time of life they should be destitute of male
issue, yet the birth of a daughter filled them with
joy. Nature had endowed this infant with extra-
ordinary beauty ; her eyebrows resembled the
autumn willow leaf, and her eyes were like the
crystal of the autumnal fountains. But she was
more happily gifted with the qualities of the mind.
She was but eleven years old when she lost her
mother, and from the period of that event she ac-
customed herself to repair to her father every day
B 2
4
JU-KIAO-LI:
for the purpose of study and to learn to read the
characters. One might almost imagine that she was
formed of the pure atmosphere of the mountains
and rivers, for nowhere could one believe that her
equal was to be found. Possessed of as much intel-
ligence and acuteness as of beauty, she had scarcely
arrived at her fourteenth or fifteenth year when she
was already thoroughly conversant with books, and
was even enabled to compose some herself. Youth-
ful as she was, she might have ranked with the first
literary characters of the empire. We have said that
the only pleasures which 'Pe enjoyed were derived
from wine and poetry. He every day amused himself
with writing verses. Houngiu thus acquired the
art of versification, and very soon excelled in it.
The father composed at his leisure some poetical
piece, and then caused his daughter to write some
verses to the same rhymes. He then taught her to
correct her own composition, pointing out the faults,
and instructing her in the means of improving it.
Blessed with such a daughter, it is easy to believe
that Pe no longer felt the want of a son. All that he
now wished for was a husband in exterior and in
merit worthy of such a damsel and that was a de-
scription of person not easily to be met with. But
time passed on : the young lady attained her six-
teenth year, and was not yet betrothed. In the mean
time the defeat of Thoumou took place; the emperor
who reigned under the title of Universal Honesty,
was led captive to the north; and the prince, his
successor, gave to his reign the name of Supreme
Splendour. Wangtchin received the punishment due
to his crimes, the ancient magistrates were recalled,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
5
and Pe, who was of their number, was made, by a
decree of the supreme court of magistrates, master
of ceremonies of the first class.
The commission was despatched without delay,
and the news arrived at Nankin. At the first blush,
Pe felt disinclined to return to public business, but
then his wish to establish his daughter suggested
some reflections. "I wish," said he to himself,
"to have some distinguished man for my son-in-
law; but in this village which I now inhabit, and
even in the neighbouring city, there are none but
persons of very limited worth if I go to court, there
I shall find assembled the most eminent in literature
that the empire can produce; I cannot fail to pro-
cure a suitable match for my daughter ; such an
opportunity must not be let slip: should the event of
a suitable marriage depend on the journey I am
about to take, and I find a son-in-law to my mind,
he will be to me as a half son, one on whom my
heart can repose itself." Having thus fixed on his
design, he took care not to decline the place to
which he had been appointed ; he chose a lucky
day for the purpose, and set out with his daughter,
Houngiu, for the capital, to take possession of his
new appointment.
On his arrival he was presented to the emperor
and installed in his office; he then set about pro-
curing a suitable residence. The office of master
of the ceremonies is nearly a sinecure. Now al-
though he was a magistrate of much integrity, and
strongly impressed with a sense of his duties, still
he possessed a considerable stock of indifference
and irresolution ; nor was Pe the man to be on the
alert for occupation. When the government sent
B 3
6
JU-KIAO-LI:
to the nine masters of the ceremonies any matter of
importance to examine, it was sufficient for two
amongst them to see to the matter, the remainder of
their colleagues having only to give in their names
if they approved of the decision; there was not,
therefore, a great deal for a magistrate to do.
Every day, when public business was done with,
Pe indulged in his favourite recreation of drinking
and making verses.
At the termination of a few months he had
formed a society of friends, like himself, who
loved wine and poetry and they amused them-
selves together in commemorating the beauties of
willows and flowers. It was about the middle of
the ninth moon, that one of Pe's dependants sent
him twelve pots of odoriferous queen marguerites.
He had them placed at the foot of the staircase
leading to his library. In the same place were
disposed rose and satyrion trees, and amaranths.
All the vases consisted of fine porcelain. The
scent of the flowers embalmed the air to a great
distance: their leaves, wreathing about the trellis-
works and banisters, disclosed at equal distances,
twelve golden heads. Pe contemplated the scene
with extreme pleasure, and came daily to repeat
the gratification. One day, whilst he was in this
place, and ardently bent on the composition of
some verses, he was disturbed by the announce-
ment of a visit from Gou, a doctor of the imperial
academy, and Sse, one of the inspectors-general of
the empire
Gou was the brother of Pe's wife,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
7
his sirname was Kouei, and his name of rank
Chouian; he was from the same country with Pe,
a steady man, and of undoubted integrity. Sse's
sirname was Youan, and his name of rank Fan-
ghoei. Although he had received his degrees in
Ho-nan, and was enrolled one of the doctors of
that province, still his first inscriptions were taken
at Nankin. He was of the same age as Pe, and
partook of his taste for wine and poetry. Between
these three magistrates there existed the closest
intimacy, and in the intervals of leisure left
them by business they eagerly sought each other
to pass the time together. As soon as they were
announced, Pe arose hastily, and went out to
meet them. As they passed much of their time
together, benevolence and courtesy reigned at
their meetings, and the restraint of formal visits
was banished from amongst them. Gentle-
men," exclaimed Pe, the moment he saw them,
" here are so many queen marguerites blown these
two days; how is it you have never come to
see them ?"
" Some days ago," answered Dr Gou, " the
seigneur Li was appointed chief examiner to
the college of Nankin, and we had to offer
him the parting feast* I have not had an in-
8
JU-KIAO-LI:
stant to spare. I fully intended .coming to see
you yesterday, but just as I was coming out,
whom should I meet but that tedious creature
Yang, who brought me a copy of verses, begging
I would correct them, for the birth-day of
viceroy Chi's wife ; ; he spoiled my whole day ;
and this morning, when I saw it was such fine
weather, I was apprehensive I should not be in
time for the flowers; so 1 have been to bring
the seigneur Sse, and came here without further
delay."
"And I also wished," replied Sse, " to come
here to see you ; but we had a great deal to do
at our office, so that I have unfortunately missed
the perfume."
Whilst thus conversing, the three friends entered
the apartment. After having addressed to each
other the customary salutations, they took off their
outside garments and then prepared for tea. Pe
first invited them to pass into the library to view
the queen marguerites. The golden colour of these
flowers, combined with the purplish tints of the
amaranths, formed on each side the resemblance of
a double line of vermilion. Gou and Sse expa-
tiated on the beauty of these flowers, and whilst
the three friends were fixed in admiration of them,
Pe ordered his servants to bring some wine for his
guests. After having drunk some cups *, Dr
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
9
Gou began. These flowers are beautiful without
ornament," said he : art has nothing to do with
their lustre. The red, the blue, the yellow, the
white, all this variety of hues which adorn them,
derive their brightness from the pure influence of
nature. It is by their very simplicity that they at-
tract and fix attention. It is very nearly the same
case with you and me, gentlemen; though confined
here by office, we love to retire from its embarrass-
ments, and every day to come and taste the inno-
cent pleasures of poetry and wine. Very different
from that old Yang, who is so infatuated with his
calling, that he goes about to men of rank and
power, and thinks of nothing but emolument and
promotion :- what a fit subject for ridicule, when
compared even with these simple productions of
nature!"
"Nay, I rather think," answered Pe, smiling,
" that the world is much more disposed to ridicule
you and me, for thus deserting our employments,
and choosing to end our days amidst the breath and
in the society of flowers and shrubs."
"Those who laugh at us, have excellent reasons
for it," said Sse " and it is we that are wrong to
laugh at Yang."
"How should we be wrong in laughing at him?"
asked Dr Gou.
" The court is the temple of emolument and
reputation," replied Sse; those who labour
to acquire either the one or the other, are
there in their proper place. But you and I, who
are neither avaricious nor ambitious, wherefore
should we lose ourselves amidst those labyrinths,
if it is not to draw on ourselves the ridicule of our
B 5
10
JU-KIAO-LI.
neighbours, particularly seigneur Pe and I, who
have neither sons nor heirs."
At these words Pe sighed deeply. "Seigneur,"
said he, " " you are perfectly right, and I see it
just in the same way that you do. However, every
one knows his own business best, and for
my part, if I remain here, it is certainly not
because I would hesitate to lay down this black
cap *."
"The seigneur Gou is a member of the im-
perial academy," replied Sse, " and the seig-
neur Pe a magistrate of the old foundation;
during the intervals of leisure from your employ-
ment, you can retire from public life, and enjoy
in this retreat the pleasures of wine and poetry.
As for me, who am in the free speech department,
the very nature and obligations of my office ren-
der it almost insupportable. When a person is in-
clined to speak, that is the time he must hold his
tongue and if he is disposed to be silent, then it is
that he is obliged to speak. I cannot endure it any
longer I am only waiting the promotion the em-
peror is going to make, to beg to be sent on some
foreign mission. I, then quit this place, and follow
my own inclinations."
" A poet of the dynasty of Thang," re-
plied Gou, " has a distich which imports that
an eloquent man is like the wild marguerite. Its
home is amidst the mountains, and hence it is that
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
1-1
the seigneur now speaks to us of solitude. Since
then you and I take so much pleasure in drinking
and enjoying the beautiful appearance of these
flowers, the best thing we can do, is to retire to the
depths of some desert in the midst of the moun-
tains."
The three friends thus passed their time chat/
ting and jesting, and now and then taking a cup
of wine. Their discourse, which was continued
with the utmost confidence and harmony, soon
became animated, and the fancy struck them to
begin and compose verses. Pe ordered his ser-
vants to bring pens and ink; and seating himself
near Gou and Sse, they proposed each to write
verses on the queen marguerites which they had so
much admired. They still held the pens in their
hands, when a servant hastily entered, and informed
his master, that seigneur Yang, the inspector=gene-
ral, had just arrived. This news was not at all wel-
come to the three friends and Pe, abusing his ser-
vant, said, " Stupid thing, did you not know that
I was engaged with seigneurs Gou and Sse ?
You should have told him that I was not at
home."
Sir," replied the servant, "I told him you had
gone out to make some visits ; but seigneur Yang's
servant told me, that his master had been to seig-
neur Sse's, and was there informed that he had
come to take some refreshment here. This is the
reason he is come to look for him. Besides, there
are the chairs of the two gentlemen at the door;
so that my answer was useless." Pe was still me-
ditating, when another servant hastened to tell
him that Yang had absolutely entered the house,
B 6
12
JU-KIAO-LI:
and was coming up stairs. Pe was then obliged
to get up, and without altering either cap or gir-
dle, and being loosely dressed, went out to meet
him.
Yang, who was one of the inspectors-general of
the empire, had been a chum of Pe's, and brought
up with him; but he was a person of common
place and disagreeable conversation, affable and in-
sinuating in exterior, but really grasping and jea-
lous. His intriguing and officious disposition had
provoked against him a number of enemies. As
soon as he entered the apartment, and saw Pe, he
exclaimed, " Seigneur, excellent man-all friends,
gentlemen-so, having these exquisite flowers at
home, you ask Gou and Sse to come and see you,
and never say a word to me, as if I was not your
old school-fellow."
" I should have been very happy to in-
vite you," answered Pe; " but I really thought
that press of important business would have pre-
vented you. Besides, it is only a little friendly
meeting, brought about by a similarity of taste
in the party. It is quite a chance that Sse
and my relation Gou should have come here to-
gether to-night, for no invitation had been given
them."
Upon Pe requesting him, Yang laid aside his out-
ward garments, made his reverence, and without
waiting for tea, went into the library. The mo-
ment Gou and Sse saw him come in, they were
constrained to rise and approach him, both ad-
dressing him at the same time. "Seigneur Yang,
to what blessed inspiration are we indebted for the
felicity of this visit ?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
13
Yang, first saluting Sse, said to him, " Let
me tell you, you are a very sad neighbour,
when there is such amusement here, to run
away from me, and keep it all to yourself; that is
not fair." He then saluted Gou, and broke forth in
acknowledgments :-"I yesterday put into requisi-
tion your poetical talents, and you have, I must
say, converted ' iron into gold:' I brought the com-
position to the viceroy Chi; he was enchanted with
it, and gave me the best reception I have ever met
with from him."
" Oh if the viceroy Chi has been well pleased,"
replied Gou, laughing, "it is on account of your
politeness and attention, and not from the little
composition you presented to him."
In my situation," replied Yang, " this compo-
sition was rather a tribute due from my office, than
a simple offering of courtesy."
Sse interposed good humouredly. "You have just
been complaining," said he to Yang, "that [ have
not brought you with me to see these flowers now
it strikes me, that you are not altogether so open
with me, when you are thinking of visiting the pa-
laces of the great, and celebrating the birth-days
of fair ladies. So you see, we are all even with
each other." They then all burst out laughing.
Pe then ordered a cup and spoon for each, and
begged his guests to be seated.
Yang, having drunk but two cups, observed to
Sse, Although on this anniversary we were sepa-
rated from each other, my heart was really with
you my motive is not to curry favour with the great,
but I have an excellent thing in view, on which I
wish to consult you."
14
JU-KIAO-LI:
" Pray inform me," replied Sse, " what this
matter is : let me know it, I beseech you."
"The queen Wangkouei," answered Yang, is
going to be made empress the decree is drawn up ;
and the viceroy Wangtsiouan is admitted amongst
the connexions of the emperor. Now there is a very
large property situated about a couple of leagues
from the city, which he is very desirous of having ;
he has got one of his household to obtain posses-
sion of it. For some days back our counsel have
been talking a great deal about the matter, and a
suit against him is spoken of. The old seigneur
Tchu is a leading man in the affair. The report
reached the viceroy Wang; and feeling somewhat
disconcerted, he sent a friend to request that I would
settle the matter; but knowing who Tchu was, I
made frequent overtures to him without effect.
Now as I know that you and he are the best friends,
and that he has great confidence in you, if you will
but interpose, I am convinced that all will be ended.
The viceroy Wang will never forget it, and his gra-
titude will be infinite. You and I, you know, who
fill public offices, must now and then oblige per-
sons of this sort; and really, after all, what great
crime is it? What is your opinion?"
As he listened, Sse showed that he was not
pleased, and candidly said, "Sir, if Wangtsiouan
wants to take advantage of his alliance with the
emperor, to enable him to seize the houses and
lands of the people, it is not Tchu who should de-
nounce the crime; but it is your duty and my duty
to cry out against it. Why are you anxious to
cushion this matter ? This is carrying subservi-
ency and selfishness a little too far."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
15
Yang, concluding from Sse's tone and manner,
that he was not in a very complying humour, held
his tongue; but Pe burst out laughing, and said,
" Seigneur Yang, I thought you came here pur-
posely to have a sight of my queen marguerites,
but now I see that you wanted to transact some
business for Wangtsiouan; it was very good of
you to complain that I had not gone to invite-
you."
"Here, gentlemen," exclaimed Gou, laughing,
" here is some agreeable work for you! Come, let us
go on drinking and making verses : it is really
quite preposterous to come here amidst these
flowers and shrubs to talk politics; and I pro-
pose that seigneur Yang be fined a good large
cup, to expiate this treason against the god of
flowers."
Yang, somewhat disturbed by the unexpected re-
ception he met with from Sse, became quite dis-
concerted at the railleries of Pe and Gou : never-
theless, he attempted an exculpation. It was
really seigneur Sse that began the subject, and I
only by chance mentioned this matter," said he:
"I had no thought of it at first; why therefore
should I be punished ?"
" 'Tis a settled thing," answered Pe ; " drink it
you must;" and ordering a servant to bring a large
cup, he presented it to Yang, who took it, saying,
"Well, I submit to the fine; but if from this moment
any one drops a word about the court or the go-
vernment, I will not spare him."
" Oh ! that's quite superfluous," interposed Dr
Gou. Yang emptied his glass, and taking up pen
and ink, said, "Now, gentlemen, you are all three
16
JU-KIAO-L1:
in the full mood of composing : won't you let me
see what you have been writing?"
We were certainly intent upon composing, but
we have not yet put pen to paper."
"If that be the case," said Yang, "let me not
disturb your inspirations; give vent to your effusions
then, and scatter freely the pearls and diamonds of
your poetry. In the mean time, I shall keep up
with you in drinking, as well as I can."
" Seigneur Yang," rejoined Pe, " if we are to
have this amusement at all, why not compose
as well as we? It will be a little diversion to
us all."
Well, I see you are determined not to leave me
to myself," answered Yang ; "but you know very
well that it would be almost out of my power to
compose even a stanza."
Pe began to laugh. " What !" said he, " you that
compose such eloquent anniversary pieces, you that
celebrate the merit and the virtues of the great,
their birth days, and what not-you who can
do all these with so much ease, to balk at a
stanza of ten characters? But I see how it is
unfortunately my queen marguerites yield no in-
spiration."
"A fine !" exclaimed Yang: "Seigneur Pe, a fine
of ten cups on you. Awhile ago, I was condemned
for having spoken of the court and the government
there, you are in the same predicament. Do you
mean to say that you won't pay the penalty ?" And
he forthwith caused a large cup to be filled and pre-
sented to Pe.
"But 'tis not talking of the court," said Gou,
to drop a word about an anniversary piece."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
17
" Anniversary piece, as much as you like," re-
joined Sse, smiling; "but you may depend upon it,
it must be very closely connected with politics, or
Yang would never have composed it. Pe must
undergo the fine ; beyond all doubt, he ought to
pay it."
Pe tossed off the cup good-humouredly. "The
fine is paid; and now, if we are to versify at all, let
us think of a subject, and let every defaulter be
condemned in the penalty of ten large cups."
Well thought of," said Gou.
" For goodness' sake, gentlemen," exclaimed
Yang, "do not exercise your superior talents at
my expense. The other day his majesty wanted to
send some one to the captive emperor, but no one
would go. It was a very serious undertaking, no
doubt; had the task been only to compose verses
or drink wine, the difficulty would not certainly have
been so great."
"Politics again from Yang!" cried out Sse. " Has
he not incurred the fine
But Pe, wearied with the childish vanity of Yang,
was now provoked, and in a burst of honest indig-
nation said, "Seigneur Yang, this is not the lan-
guage of a rational man: you and I are in office-
are we not then both the servants of the emperor?
No matter where he chooses to send any of us, east
or west, north or south ; how can you say that
nobody could be found to obey him If his ma-
jesty orders any one to such a place, can he excuse
himself from going? And if what you have just
stated be the fact, what is the use of the emperor
giving away so many honours and lucrative places?"
Yang put on a forced smile. "That is precisely
18
JU-KIAO-LI:
what a faithful and zealous subject would say; but
if it were imposed on any one just to carry into
practice this description of yours, I doubt if he
would not begin with trembling limbs."
"No one but a fool or a knave would entertain
these fears, when he is doing his duty," exclaimed
Pe.
Gou and Sse, seeing the probable result of this
dialogue, determined to divert them from the sub-
ject. "Gentlemen," said they, "it was ruled that
politics should be avoided; you have both con-
travened the agreement; you. are, therefore, fined
two large cups;" and they called for the cups.
Yang declined his, and was going on ; but Pe tossed
off his cup without minding Yang. He ordered it
to be filled again, and in drinking it said, "I have
been too hasty in my expressions ; my indiscretion
called down a fine of two cups-I have drunk them;
but seigneur Yang may take his or not, as he likes;
I shall not take the liberty of pressing him."
" Why do you fly out so, seigneur?" said Yang,
laughing; there can be no reason for disobedience
on my part; and when I have finished my cups, it
will only remain for me to take your commands and
admire good verses."
"Now that you are in the vein of composing,
quick and drink," said Sse.
Yang complied. "Now, gentlemen," said he,
" that I have done all you wanted, and since you
are going to start, just tell me your subject, and
allow me to meditate at my ease."
We have no other subject than the queen
marguerites, and that's an excellent one," said
Gou.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
19
" But I am not in humour for making verses
to-day," observed Pe "and if you wish to compose,
I request you to go on : I must retire."
At these words Yang exclaimed, "Seigneur Pe,
you are a sad deceiver: just now, when I wanted not
to compose, you insisted that I should, and you de-
creed a punishment of ten cups against him who
should refuse; now that I have consented, you tell us
you won't do so yourself; but you only want to mock
me. As you know that I am no poet, you do not
choose to sing with me; however, though Iam unskil-
ful, and though one may very well blush to be seated
at the same table with me for my bad phrases and ill-
turned verses, surely these blemishes in a precious
stone will not cause any dishonour to your lordship.
If you abstain, you break your own law, and the.
punishment ought to be doubled : so stay where you
are, for you really must drink."
"If I must, I submit," answered Pe; " but as for
composing, I am resolved not to do it."
If you prefer drinking," said Yang, "that's quite
enough; and he ordered a large cup quite full.
The others wished to dissuade Pe from taking it,
but he grasped the cup and emptied it two or three
times. Yang wanted to fill it again, when Gou said-
"Pe, having declined composing, has been con-
demned in a cup the account is square."
"No abatement from what has been laid down,"
said Yang: " he must absolutely take the twenty
cups."
"My greatest pleasure is to be drinking beneath
these flowering shrubs," said Pe, laughing; but
what interest has your lordship in this matter, that
20
JU-KIAO-LI
you are so urgent?" But he took the cup, and, large
as it was, began to drink.
" It is not your pleasure or mine that we are
talking about now," said Yang, also laughing; "take
off your twenty cups, and there is no more to be
said ;" and he filled out another cup. But the vapours
of the wine getting into Pe's head, he began to feel
somewhat unsteady, and was gradually losing all
sense of Yang's importunities, who, nevertheless,
continued them. After he had taken another cup,
Pe finding himself not well on his seat, rose as
well as he could, and went behind a screen,
where he lay down on a bed, and soon fell fast
asleep.
Yang wanted now to follow and torment him more,
but was prevented by Sse. The seigneur," said he,
" has been drinking too rapidly he has been suf-
ficiently punished by five or six cups; wait, let him
sleep a little."
"He is but a miserable drinker," said Yang; "but
he shall not get off of a single cup."
" If we are to inflict the rest of the fine upon him,
let us wait at all events until we have completed
our verses : for if we do not compose, what right
shall we have to fine at all ?"
"A very just reflection," said Sse.
" Well gentlemen," said Yang, resuming his seat,
" as you please; but when we shall have done, don't
you believe that he will be disinclined to drink; if
he refuses, I'll spill the liquor over him."
They then took paper and pen, and directing
themselves towards the flowers, began their task by
murmuring the following lines:-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
21
Ne'er expect that the cup its true balm will afford,
Until fond faithful friendship shall hallow the board
They who own not the links that connect heart with heart,
Shall in vain seek the pleasures which song can impart.
Song and wine ! the best joys that humanity knows,
Amidst any save friends, they but turn into woes.
Ever since Pe lost his wife, he discarded all
females of the second rank from his household. His
domestic affairs, even those of the greatest im-
portance, were entirely under the control of his
daughter Houngiu; and he even frequently con-
sulted her on matters of business. On the present
occasion a servant went to apprize her of the dis-
pute between her father and Yang with respect to
the verses they were to have composed. When she
heard all that had occurred, being mindful of the
malignity of Yang, she dreaded that her father
had been betrayed by his candour into the use of
expressions which would bring him into serious
trouble.
"Is your master now composing?" asked Houn-
giu of the servant.
No; he has declined it. Seigneur Yang has
obliged him to take five or six cups of wine very
rapidly and my master, finding himself almost stu-
pified, went to lie down, and is now asleep."
" And Yang and the rest, are they still drinking
or composing?"
'They are all composing; but seigneur Yang
only waits until his verses are made, to go and
teaze my master again."
" Do you know if your master be really overcome
by the wine, or does he only affect to be so?"
He has taken several cups; and although he is
22
JU-KIAO-LI :
not completely intoxicated, I am quite certain that
the wine has got into his head."
The young lady considered for a moment.
" Well, as your master is asleep, go you, and with-
out any one seeing you, take him the paper contain-
ing the subject of composition ; and when you have
done so, fetch the paper for me to look at."
The servant accordingly returned to where the
company was, and taking advantage of a moment
of abstraction, took away the sheet, and carried it
to his young mistress. She was not long in dis-
covering that the subject was the queen marguerites.
She called to her attendant Yansen, to fetch pen
and ink, and then she wrote some verses of seven
syllables. She next took a piece of paper in which
she traced some lines, which she gave to the servant,
and said to him, "Take these verses, with this little
note, and go to the couch where your master sleeps,
and wait there till he wakes. As soon as his slum-
ber is over, hand these to him; and be sure that
seigneur Yang does not observe you."
The servant repaired immediately to the library,
where he saw Doctor Gou yet holding his pen in
the attitude of one committing something to paper,
Sse contemplating the flowers as if wishing to de-
rive inspiration from them, and Yang neither writing
nor meditating, but with his cup in hand, mut-
tering some words between his teeth as though he
had been composing. The servant however pro-
ceeded to his master's couch, and there waited until
he awoke.
Now Pe was in the habit of drinking more
than he had this day without getting intoxicated
but on this occasion he drank so rapidly, and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
23
his excitement from other causes was so great, that
the wine took immediate effect, and there was no
resisting the drowsy fit. However, this was but a
transitory insensibility : he soon awoke, and called
for a cup of tea, which was quickly brought to him.
The servant then gave him, unperceived, the verses
and note with which he had been charged by his
young mistress. Pe first read the note, as follows :
" The capital is a dangerous place of residence :
poetry and wine, instead of yielding happiness, are
there only productive of perils." Pe, on reading these
words, shook his head ; he then took the other
paper, unfolded it, and found that it contained some
verses on the queen marguerites, which had been
made for him, and which on perusal he highly ap-
proved of. He then proceeded to the table and re-
sumed his seat. The moment Sse perceived him,
he exclaimed, " What ! Seigneur Pe awake ! That's
good news."
' Gentlemen, I have been for a moment deprived
of the pleasure of your society. What! are all your
verses finished?" inquired Pe.
"Seigneur," said Yang, " you played the drunkard
tolerably well; but are you aware that you have
yet fourteen cups to take off? Just wait until my
verses are completed, and I am determined not to
give you the indulgence of even a cup."
" Now, brother Pe," said Gou, " what's the reason
that you, who are so able, now that you are awake,
will not take up-your pen ? You will save yourself
he fine, and you know when the stag is dead,
nobody asks who killed it."
But let me tell you," said Pe, laughing, that
my verses are composed; but I don't wish to shew
24
JU-KIAO-L1:
them before seigneur Yang, for he would ridicule
their inferiority."
" Do not jest at me," said Yang "undoubtedly
you are quick and clever, but it is impossible that
you can have been so wonderfully expeditious as all
this. If really your verses are completed, it will fall
to my lot to drink the fine. But it is out of the ques-
tion: you are only joking; and in addition to the
fourteen cups, you should drink three more; other-
wise our agreement is violated."
" Well, well, if you will have it that the verses
are not composed," replied Pe, " be it so but if you
will allow that they can be in existence, I shall just
produce them. These discussions lead to nothing."
Pe then handed him the paper of verses which he
held in his hand. Sse took them. " Positively,
Pe has written his verses-that is strange." Gou
and Yang took and read them, one after the other,
as follows :-
TO THE QUEEN MARGUERITE.
Fair flower ! for whose beauties kind nature united
Her deep purple shade, and her bright tints of snow
In her gold she then deck'd thee, and lastly invited
Her carnation along the soft surface to glow.
By what hand wert thou flung from Elysium to earth?
And as thus through the lattice sweet flower, thou art
peeping,
Must thou waste all thy bloom for a lone maiden's mirth.
Whilst the sage that should court all thy beauties is
sleeping?
What a calm is around-'tis the stillness of heaven;
All liberty's soul seems to swell in my breast,
And I feel as if now to my spirit 'twere given,
To fly to some holier region of rest.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
25
Few-few are the hours from the world I can steal,
To forget all its cares `mid the halm of thy breathing;
Oh, give me on earth nought to see or to feel,
Through the long endless day, but thy fragrance and
wreathing.
The perusal of these verses filled the three guests
with indescribable astonishment. "You have effect-
ed a miracle," cried Sse: "not only have you written
with wonderful despatch, but your phrases are so
well selected ; they are marked by care, purity,
elegance, and strength. It is certainly a most bril-
liant effusion ; how different from what we are in
the habit of reading daily ! This is admirably per-
fect, and should make us blush to take a pen again
in our hands."
'Why, gentlemen," said Pe, " I was afraid of
being charged with obstinacy, if I any longer refused
to comply with Yang's commands. In addition to
this, I was anxious to balance the account by having
the pleasure of commending a cup to him in turn. I
have done all I could, but you have praised the
piece beyond its deserts."
"That the verses are excellent, is not to be
denied; but I have some doubts about me," said
Yang. "Pe was insensible not a minute ago he
has not laid hold of a pen since and if he be the
real author of the verses, he was bound to have
written them in our company."
Gou examined the verses several times, and at
last concluded that they were the composition of
Houngiu. He could not avoid smiling, and Yang
observed it.
What makes Gou laugh ?" he inquired. "He
must have some motive for it. If you do not give
26
JU-KIAO-LI:
me an ample explanation, I will positively pay no
fine."
Gou only laughed on; and Pe, smiling also, said,
" You fined me very heavily for not making verses :
now they are finished, it is your turn. What reason
have you for doubting? Do you suspect any pla-
giarism?"
'Gou has been laughing," said Yang : " he cer-
tainly must have a motive for it."
" Evidently," said Sse, looking at Gou, "you
wrote these verses for Pe whilst he slept."
"I shall die with confusion," said Gou. " What
I write such verses as these ?"
" If it is not you that have done this for Pe," said
Yang, "I see no other person in the room to do it.
Who composed them then?" Gou again laughed
and remained silent. "What " said Pe, " am I
incapable of writing these verses myself, that you
are so certain they must be done by some one else ?"
" Who would presume to say such a thing?"
answered Yang. "Only Gou laughed; he surely
must have had some cause. You and he are re-
lations; you favour each other, doubtless; there is
some underhand work going on to deceive me. If I
am to be fined, it is but justice that Gou should
be made, first of all, to drink three large cups: I will
drink afterwards." And he ordered a cup to be pre-
sented to Gou.
"I have incurred no fine," said the latter; "I
am in no secret; in truth there has been no plot
about these verses; but a thought strikes me that
they were made by my niece, who feared her
father was not in a condition to compose verses,
and espoused his cause."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
27
What !" cried Yang, struck with astonishment,
this masterpiece to be the composition of your
daughter?"
"Yes," said Pe, " tis so ; hearing that I was
unable to compose myself, she came to my assistance
in order to save me from the fine."
" What !" exclaimed Yang and Sse, " your
daughter to possess such an exquisite talent ? Not
only is there no young lady, but there is not a poet
in the empire, to be compared to her; and can it be
that we who spend nearly half our lives with you,
the companions of your studies, should never have
known that you had a daughter so skilled in learning
and poetry? She is a complete wonder."
" My niece not only excels in poetry," said Gou,
" but there is scarcely a book that she has not read;
she manages her pen well, and composes extem-
poraneously with the greatest ease."
"Then," said Sse, " if that be the case, it ap-
pears that a young lady possesses all the merit
of the first doctors of the empire."
"Yes," replied Pe, " in the decline of my life, the
talents of my daughter console me; but unfortunately
she is not yet established."
" If I remember rightly," said Sse, " you told
me your daughter had attained her sixteenth or
seventeenth year."
She is now sixteen," said Pe.
Is she yet betrothed?" inquired Yang.
No," replied Pe. "I have the misfortune in my
old age to have no son. Since my wife was snatched
from me by a premature death, I have devoted
myself to the education of my daughter ; and up to
28
JU-KIAO-LI:
this day I have not been able to make any engage-
ment for her."
'To establish a son, and get a daughter married,
are two things of very great importance," said
Yang. "You should not lose a moment in procur-
ing an establishment for your child."
"Nor does he wish to lose a moment," rejoined
Gou ; "but the difficulty is to find a man of merit
for a son-in-law."
"The capital is a large city," said Yang. "Why
cannot you find out some distinguished young man
of birth for her husband? I will undertake the
business to-morrow morning."
"Nay, but all this while," interposed Pe, " your
elegant compositions are still unfinished ; let me
request you will resume them."
" Pearls and precious stones glitter in our eyes,"
said Sse, "and I should be ashamed, for one, to
sully them with my dust. If you take my advice,
you will all give up, and let us inflict upon our-
selves a fine of three cups each."
"Well said !" exclaimed Yang. "I am for drink-
ing."
Gou was about to conclude his verses, but seeing
the other two undergoing their fine, he also con-
sented to the three cups.
Drinking, and conversing on the verses they so
much admired, made the time pass agreeably until
n gnting of the lantern; the three guests then
returned to their respective homes. Those who do
not know what afterwards happened, may have their
curiosity satisfied in the next chapter.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
29
CHAPTER II.
OLD YANG WISHES TO HAVE HIS SON MARRIED.
"Take a father's word, and his son is a paragon ; but the first trial ex.
poses his dulness. A virtuous girl was never won by wealth. Violence
alone can make her wed a bad man. Hypocrisy does not finally succeed ;
and merit, with similarity of disposition, will alone stand the test."
WHEN he called to mind what had occurred at
Pe's, and thought of the verses on the queen mar-
guerites, but particularly of the composition of
Houngiu, Yang resolved to ask this young person in
marriage for his son. He had two children, a son
and a daughter. Yang Fang was the name of the
first : he was just twenty his appearance was by no
means disagreeable, but of his literary accomplish-
ments a great deal could not be said. His father's
influence had, however, procured for him unmerited
advancement, until he became a candidate for license
in the province of Chansi ; but he had failed at the
general examination, and was obliged to return with
his father to the capital, there to continue his
studies. But yet it occurred to Yang that Pe was
a man of an inflexible nature, and that with re-
spect to the choice of a son-in-law his notions
were irrevocably fixed. Nothing, to be sure, was
more easy than to broach the business; but to
bring it to an issue was the grand difficulty.
Yang thought of it again and again, not well know-
30
JU-KIAO-LI:
ing what course to pursue. One day, as he was
returning home from visiting, he perceived, as he
approached the door of his house, a man attired in
blue, with a letter in his hand ; this person fell
on his knees in the street, and presented the letter
to him : ' here," said he, " is a letter that Mr
Wang, of the province of Tchekiang, has addressed
to your lordship."
" Is it from Mr Wang of the ministry of the
personal inquired Yang, looking at it. "The
same," answered the man in blue. Yang imme-
diately ordered his servant to take the letter, and
told the man to wait a moment. He came off his
horse, went to his apartment, and while disrobing
himself, he opened the letter and read as follows :
"Your brother Wang-Kouemow has the honour to
present his respects to you. On my return from
Siangpou, I found that your excellency had al-
ready repaired to the eminent post which you oc-
cupy in the capital. Spring was turned into win-
ter for me; the gravity, the nobleness of your excel-
lency, the weight which you possess, distinguish
you above all your colleagues. I have ascertained
this much even in my remote situation, and it fills
me with joy. This letter will be handed you by Liao-
teming, my countryman and friend ; he is a learned
man, and a true mirror of polite knowledge. He is,
besides, a very good astrologer, and has made excel-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
31
lent predictions under various circumstances ; I en-
tertain a particular esteem for him; he is now about
to make a journey to the capital, and I take the li-
berty of recommending him to you. He can be of
service to you in everything concerning the art of
divination. If you would condescend to cast an eye
on him, and vouchsafe some favour to him, good
Liao alone will not have to express gratitude, but I
shall feel it my duty to prove mine according to my
humble means."
As soon as Yang finished reading the letter, and
saw that it was only a recommendation of an astro-
loger, he did not feel any great concern; but he
could not avoid ordering a servant to go and see if
Liao, who brought a letter from seigneur Wang, was
waiting and if he was, to request he would come
in. The servant did as he was directed, and imme-
diately returned with a visiting card, and told his
master that Mr Liao was coming. A moment af-
terwards, a personage was seen ascending the stair-
case ; and this is the exact description of his
appearance. He had on a square cap, and affected
the deportment of a man of letters; but there was
something rustic in his attire. He might have been
taken for a hermit issuing from his cell. His beard
and mustaches were short, but thick and disor-
dered ; his eyes, wild and starting, almost re-
sembled a pair of bounding balls; in making his
salutation, he advanced his body, and precipitately
drew back again, without grace, but with an air
of profound humility. When he commenced speak-
ing, he turned his head one way, and his eyes were
directed in another. You saw a covetous dispo-
32
JU-KIAO-LI:
sition painted in his very face. He pretended to
be an astrologer, but in fact his real character
was that of a parasite.
As soon as he saw Liao, Yang advanced to meet
him, and led him to the apartment. After the first
compliments had been passed, they respectively
sat down in those places which custom assigns to
the host and his visitors. Liaoteming opened the
conversation.
"I have had an anxiety for a long time to be-
come acquainted with you, but never had the op-
portunity. On this occasion I am charged with a
message to your excellency from seigneur Wang,
and I avail myself of it to present myself in per-
son before you; my happiness exceeds my expec-
pectations."
" Wang speaks in the highest terms of your ac-
complishments and talents in this letter you give
me the greatest pleasure in honouring me with this
visit."
In a few minutes tea was brought. Yang conti-
nued-"You - have come, no doubt, to exercise your
art in the capital, but we have already a good
number of your order here."
"I am one altogether unskilled in the mode of
recommending myself; I have with me a good
number of letters of introduction, but I am fearful
that the deserving and the ignorant are equally
despised, and it is not quite certain that I shall
make use of these letters. I have presented my-
self to your excellency to-day; to-morrow I shall
go and visit Tchin, who is from my own country ;
then I shall call on Ju, the sub-governor of the heir-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
33
apparent; next, the viceroy Chi ; then Pe, the mas-
ter of ceremonies ; and three or four other persons
of distinction."
As soon as the man mentioned Pe, a thought
came across Yang's mind, and he inquired if this
was Pe the master of ceremonies, his fellow student.
"The same, your excellency's fellow student,"
answered Liaoteming.
"Now," said Yang to himself, "what if I make
this fellow a go-between to effect the marriage?
Andhaving ordered some refreshments to be brought,
he invited the astrologer to accompany him to the
library.
The latter wanted to excuse himself. "I have
been but scarcely introduced to you. I have not
as yet been able to serve you in any way. Why
should I thus put you to inconvenience?"
" If you were another sort of person, I should
not seek to detain you, certainly ; but as you are a
man of talent, I have, luckily, a little matter in
hand with respect to which I am anxious to con-
sult you."
As soon as they gained the library, Liaoteming
immediately said, "Let me ask your excellency
just to turn your face this way, that I may exa-
mine it."
"That is unnecessary," said Yang, "as it is
respecting the horoscope * of my son that I want to
have your judgment."
34
JU-K1AO-LI:
Yang, having called for pen, ink, and paper,
wrote four lines, which he presented to Liaoteming.
The latter attentively examined them, and said,
"Your son's horoscope appears extremely fortunate;
the five elements are there combined in the most
perfect harmony; it is a bough pulled from the
grove of olive-trees-it is a piece of jasper from
the mountain of the pole, obedient to the most be-
nignant influences of the stars. It is needless to
speak of the success he has had, from his tenderest
youth, in his examinations; but it would not at
all surprise me if, at his twentieth year, (according
to the character, No. 10,) his head became erect,
and foppishly adorned. That is nothing; but when
he shall attain his twenty-fifth year, which will be
marked No. 13 in the cycle, and when he shall re-
ceive the influence of the south, I behold him ad-
vancing to the lake of Phonix, and wandering
through the academic shades. It is then that he
will have attained the height of his ambition. It
only remains to say, that the house of marriage
should not be opened too speedily for him; and if
he is established very soon, it may be unfortunate."
Yang began to laugh. " Your computation is ex-
cellent, admirable. My son did certainly present
himself at the general examination, and was not
accepted. He is now at my house pursuing his
studies, and I have already frequently thought of
establishing him, but he will not listen to it, until
he has obtained a doctorship: however, as I know
his attainments and the extent of his abilities, I am
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
35
inclined to believe that it is his destiny to begin
by marriage."
Rich and distinguished individuals are go-
verned by destiny-what human means can free
them from it? Your son has formed no engagement
yet?"
"I had concluded one for him with the grand-
daughter of governor Lieou of my own country,
but unfortunately she was snatched away by an
early death before the time of marriage. This has
suspended my purpose to this time."
" Such an event as that must have been brought
about by destiny but if your purpose be marriage,
you should select some rich lady born under
happy auspices, to form a fortunate union."
The servants having now brought in refreshments,
Yang invited his guest to sit down ; and then, whilst
they were together, drinking occasionally, the con-
versation proceeded. "Has your son anybody in
view now ?" inquired Liaoteming.
" We have had several propositions from rich
and desirable quarters, but intellect and disposi-
tion are wanting. I have just learned that Pe has a
daughter incomparably gifted with talent and
beauty. Within these few days back I dined at
Pe's, and after dinner we set ourselves to write
verses. Pe, in consequence of having drunk a
little too much, was incapable of composing; his
daughter undertook the task secretly, and com-
posed a piece of verse, the best and most elegant
that it is possible to conceive, insomuch that we
veteran bards had not courage to go on."
" If the young lady possesses such a talent, she
appears to be the paragon of her sex. But your
36
JU-KIAO-LI:
son is an excellent scholar; heaven has sent them
into the world for each other. Besides, you and
her father are fellow students, your fortunes are
equal :-why do you not get some mutual friend to
break the matter ?"
" Yes, the prospect is a good one but then my
old school fellow is so very singular a charac-
ter; in the selection of a son-in-law he is the most
difficult to please; and if you open the matter to
him, he will evade the subject by a thousand ex-
cuses. It is this consideration that has induced me
to abstain from applying to him myself on the busi-
ness. I found out two days ago, that he was intent
upon procuring a son-in-law. Now, if there were
some mutual friend who would undertake to de-
scribe the merits and accomplishments of my son,
and if he was favourably received by the good man,
then we might have a mediator who would very
soon settle the affair."
" An excellent thought. For my own part, I fear
that what I should say could make no impression,
and I should despair of gaining his confidence.
However, if in the course of my interview with Pe
to-morrow, I can find an opportunity for introducing
something about the talents and qualifications of
your son, depend upon it, 1 shall not fail to do so."
" You are infinitely obliging: I could not have
had the presumption to ask you."
"I perceived your reserve, but it is not merely
the benefit of your son that I consult, when I am
asking for this accomplished lady. No; to offer a
son-in-law of so much merit to Pe, is, I conceive,
doing him a very great piece of service."
In this manner Yang and Liaoteming carried on
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
37
the conversation for some time, intermingling the
pleasure of drinking with their discourse. The
latter rose to take leave. " Where do you stop?"
asked Yang : "for I have not yet had the honour of
calling on you."
" I have taken an apartment at the hotel Tchet-
chinhoei, but I should be sorry to give you the
trouble of calling on me."
Yang politely saw him to the door, and as he de-
parted, assured the astrologer that if this pro-
ject succeeded, he would feel under infinite obliga-
tions to him.
Liaoteming, full of the affair that had been in-
trusted to him, retired to his hotel to pass the night.
Next day, having completed his toilet, and de-
spatched his breakfast, he gave to his servant his
letter of recommendation from Wang, and pro-
ceeded to Pe's. He first sent in the letter, and in
a little time was ushered into an apartment of the
house, where he took a seat. Pe soon appeared ;
and the first salutations being over, Liao stated the
object of his journey. Tea was then brought, and
as soon as they partook of it, Pe addressed his
visitor.
"Seigneur Wang has spoken very highly of
your supernatural talents but how can an hum-
ble man of letters, like myself, be of any use
to you?"
"Your excellency," rejoined Liao, " is so distin-
guished for brilliant qualities, and your eminent
virtues are so generally acknowledged, that you
have obtained the confidence of the whole empire.
It is not the good fortune of one so little skilled
in his art as I am, to behold such shining qualifica-
38
JU-KIAO-LI
tions; but yet, if you will condescend to do so, let
me beg that you will turn your face in this direc-
tion, that I may endeavour to read some traces of
your destiny."
Pe turned his chair in front of his guest, and
observed-" The seer cannot know so much of the
happiness, as he can of the calamities, that are to
befal a person."
Liaoteming, intently looking at Pe, seemed to
contemplate his countenance with the deepest at-
tention, and then said, " Yes, I behold a set of
features quite celestial-awfully severe as the sa-
cred mountains those brows that, as they rise, ap-
pear to hide themselves under the temples on both
sides-those eyes which sparkle like stars in
freezing weather-there is formed a countenance of
pride ! It is the indication of primitive disinte-
restedness in public, of a noble elevation in adver-
sity, of an honesty of purpose tried by events. What
is better still, there is a straight line in which five
others converge : it is the line of riches and ho-
nours. Nothing is to be feared for, save an excess
of happiness in the present, and too great disin-
terestedness; for when carried to this extent, purity
of soul becomes an injustice to our posterity; at
least, such is the opinion. But lo ! in the midst of
this unbounded happiness I behold the lines of
some undefined want-a son, I should say, or a son-
in-law ; and here it is necessary that there must be
some extraordinary encounter, altogether different
from the usual course of events."
" With respect to a son," said Pe, with a sigh,
" it is long since I gave up the hope of having one
my only wish now is to procure a son-in-law on
OB, THE TWO COUSINS.
39
whom I can lean in my old age and as to the
riches and honours you speak of, I regard them but
as empty shadows, or as the insignificant thing I
tread on."
" I give full credit to these exalted sentiments,
but much as you may despise worldly advantages,
you will do well to consider what I have just said.
Some occurrence will take place which you have
not the least notion of and although you have not
a son born to you, an extraordinary encounter is
sure to happen that will produce what will be as
much to you. Now, undoubtedly, the good here
has an aspect towards evil, and unless you avail
yourself of your good fortune, something bad will
take place ; that you may depend upon. You will
impress this presage in your memory, and before
long you will be able to determine whether or not
I am an impostor."
" Sir, you are a guide in the midst of darkness ;
and I feel obliged to you."
Tea was again served, when Pe addressed his
guest. "Now, sir, in repairing from Tchekiang to
the capital, you have made a voyage of more than
three thousand miles by water, and had an oppor-
tunity, doubtless, of observing a great variety of
men. Pray have you met amongst the young men
of the present day who have exhibited talents and
acquirements, any one who was particularly to your
fancy?"
'Why, as to the ordinary description of bache-
lors, they are to be met with everywhere; but if
you allude to that rare merit which casts a lustre
on the age in which it is produced, and which is
famous from one end of the empire to the other,
40
JU-KIAO-LI:
I know of no one superior to the young son of
seigneur Yang." And having said' this, the seer
rose to depart.
" What seigneur Yang do you mean ?" asked
Pe, impatiently. Is it Yang Tseuhian, my fellow
student?"
"I mean Yang who comes from the province of
Kiangsi, sirnamed Thingtchao; but I was not aware
that he was your fellow student."
" It is the same; but he has only one son, who
took out his license some years ago. I have seen
him, and I confess he struck me as being only a
very common-place person ; and with respect to his
examinations, I do not know that he made himself at
all remarkable. What is it that gives you such a
favourable opinion of him, sir? ?"
" Why, as to literature, I confess I do not pretend
to any great judgment respecting it ; but if I may
believe his horoscope and the aspect of the stars, I
should say that he possesses a degree of merit not
very common amongst scholars; nay, that he would
one day approve himself a man of the first order,
that would take his seat in the Hall of Jasper, or
mount the Golden Horse*. But I do not rely on
his horoscope alone ; he had some success at the
provincial examinations. He is now twenty, lives
in retirement for the purpose of perfecting him-
self, and as yet feels no inclination for marriage.
This is the only thing against him; but your ex-
cellency I see, esteems him a mere common-place
person."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
41
"I was ignorant of all this," replied Pe.
After some further conversation, Liao rose to take
leave. "I should be very happy," said Pe, to
detain you for dinner, but that I am engaged to a
friend at his country seat to-day. It is a great want
of politeness in me indeed to allow you to go so
soon." And he ordered a servant to fold up an
ounce note*, and present it to Liao. The latter
accepted it with an humble reverence; and after
expressing his thanks two or three times, he left the
house to proceed to Yang, and give him an account
of his success.
Pe, meanwhile, was wholly occupied with what
had just passed, and felt extremely anxious to know
something positive about the younger Yang. He
did not, however, wish to be communicating with
strangers. As a lucky chance would have it,
Gou just came in at the time, and Pe invited
him to the library to partake of some refreshments.
After they had been drinking a little time, Pe asked
his brother-in-law a question. "Have you seen
Yang's son?"
" Why do you ask ?" said Gou.
Because an astrologer, or physiognomist, who
brought me a letter of introduction yesterday, when
in the course of conversation I asked him if he
knew in town any young men of birth, talent, and
virtue, answered me by uttering a splendid pane-
gyric on the son of old Yang. He declared it to be
his persuasion that this young man would one day
be a scholar of the first order, and that such was
indicated by his horoscope. I feel too interested
42
JU-KIAO-LI:
in procuring an establishment for Houngiu, to let
slip an opportunity which presses itself upon me.
That was the reason I asked you the question.
Do you know if he be really well versed in litera-
ture?"
"He certainly was admitted to examinations,"
said Gou, in the second class, on the book of
verses. I have seen him, but I am not aware of his
proficiency in literature. It is very true, I have not
attended much to it lately; but on deliberation, it
does not strike me that he can be a person of very
shining merit, for old Yang, his father, cannot
certainly boast of much and if he really had these
wonderful talents, do you think the father would
keep him buried as it were at home ?"
I participate in your suspicions; but this astro-
loger tells me that Yang Fang is only just twenty,
that he never thought of marriage, and that he was
determined to distinguish himself at examinations
before he would give a thought on the perfumed
taper of the nuptial chamber. If he is animated by
this ambition, it is very creditable to the young
man; but we are not sure that he is."
" It is the easiest thing in the world to ascertain
it," said Gou; "I shall invite father and son to
dinner to-morrow ; then you shall have an oppor-
tunity of ascertaining, by personal observation, his
manners and character, and whether or not he really
possesses talents."
" That is well planned," said Pe.
After spending a little more time together, they
separated, and Gou despatched two notes, inviting
Yang and his son to dinner the next day.
Now it so happened that Yang, who heard all
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
43
from Liaoteming, concluded that Pe was quite
favourably disposed, and he even had thoughts of
sending a friend to him to make overtures of mar-
riage at once. When he saw Gou's invitation, he was
transported with joy. "Why," said he, if Pe was
not well pleased with what Liao expressed, what
motive could Gou have in inviting me and my son
to dinner ? I see the match will take place, the
affair is in an excellent train; all that I am sorry for
is, that my son, having really no talent, may by some
unlucky expression or other shew the cloven foot.
I should like very much to find some excuse for
keeping him away; but I fear that Pe would thence
entertain some suspicions. No," said he, after a
pause, "nothing shall hinder my son from coming;
his appearance is prepossessing, he has taken his
license, and I presume that they will not ask him
to undergo an examination at the table." Yang
finally sent word that he and his son would accept
the invitation.
When the servant was gone with the answer,
Yang called his son and gave him certain instruc-
tions. " It is of importance," said he, "that you
should demean yourself, where we are going, with
the greatest modesty and humility: speak but
little; and should you be called on to compose
verses, simply to say in answer, in the presence of
my father, how should I presume to take such a
liberty
Yang Fang promised obedience. This young
man was adorned by nature with the best temper;
but he was heavy and excessively stupid. He had
obtained, no matter by what means, the degree of
44
JU-KIAO-LI
licentiate ; but if he had been asked to call to mind
any part of the theme which he had furnished on
the occasion, he would have been at a loss to recover
a single word.
At noon, on the day appointed, Gou sent a servant
to remind Yang of the invitation. The latter, ac-
companied by his son, set out immediately on
horseback. Pe had arrived some time. As soon
as Yang and his son were announced, Gou went
eagerly to meet them, and led the way to his apart-
ment. Pe and Yang saluted each other first. The
latter wished to yield the place of honour to the
former, but Pe refused. "I am come here," said
he, "only to have the pleasure of your company; I
am in my relation's house, and it is right that 1 should
be at your command."
Yang was thus under the necessity of taking the
place of honour; and after Gou had made him the
reverence, it was Yang Fang's duty to come and
salute Pe. Pe wished to give him also the superior
place; but Yang Fang refused, saying, "in presence
of my father, how should I presume to take such a
liberty?" Yang endeavoured to draw Pe to his
left, and said to him, "No, seigneur, this must
not be; young men should take their places as
they ought." Pe, not being able to take a more
humble place, seated himself in that which was as-
signed to him, and the compliments being over,
everybody took his place. Yang occupied the first
place on the eastern side, Pe the first to the west,
Yang Fang opposite, and Gou on Pe's side,
in a chair which he drew near the company.
Tea was then brought. Yang, addressing Gou,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
45
said, " I was quite in arrear with you : to what
am I indebted for the favour which you have
done me ?"
Since your son," said Gou, " has arrived in
town, I have not had the honour of his spending any
time with me. The meeting of this day is in honour
of him, and not of your lordship."
"Ought young men to receive such favours?"
said Yang. "My son was so absorbed in his studies
to-day, that he wished not to come. I said-When a
father asks you, why should you refuse his invita-
tion ? Besides, you will see a highly-gifted person,
from whose conversation you will learn more in one
day, than from all you can study in ten years. This
decided him, and he came."
If it be thus," said Pe, "that your son em-
ploys his time, he possesses a rare degree of in-
dustry."
"He has been exactly the same from his infancy,"
said Yang "his mother was always fearful that he
would waste himself away, and strove to make him
take exercise ; but he would not listen to her
several offers of marriage have been made to him,
but he refused them all. He spends his days in
perusing a certain number of books, and I scarcely
see him. I admonish him, I tell him that books are
not to be pored over in that manner ; but all to no
purpose-he will have his way."
"So much merit," said Gou, "and so decided a
preference for solitude and study, indicate a very
superior mind."
In the meantime the dinner was served by the
servants. Gou rose and invited his guests to take
their places. The latter seated themselves at table
46
JU-KIAO-LI
precisely in the order they had already observed.
They sat it out until night.
Both Pe and Gou attentively watched the de-
portment,land even the most trivial actions, of Yang
Fang. They saw, however, that he never once
opened his lips, and that when a question was
put to him, his father answered in his stead ; they
were therefore a long time in doubt what to think
of him.
At length Gou proposed to Yang one of those
small plays which consist in putting a particular
word in some sentence.
Yang, after some hesitation, agreed to choose
the word. "We have," said he, "been by no means
sparing of the wine hitherto let us take the word
'red,' and each time that any of the company puts
it in a sentence, let him take a cup."
" That is very easy indeed," said Gou : "lay
down some more difficult condition than this."
" The word being given," said Pe, we cannot
alter it; only let it be observed that each sentence
shall have an intelligible application."
"Agreed," said Yang.
As he had proposed the play, it was his duty
to put the word red in a sentence once, and drink
one cup. The servants handed the wine to him.
"It is my first turn; here it is The frost-smitten
leaves are more red than the flowers of the second
moon.'"
They were then in that stage of the eleventh
moon when the clouds are fleecy, and the leaves
of the trees begin to assume a red tinge. Yang
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
47
attempted naturally to describe the current season.
He then passed the cup to Pe, who wished to de-
cline it in favour of Yang Fang but the latter
decidedly refused it. Pe, on account of being
second, had to put the word twice, in different
sentences. He drank his cup, and uttered the first.
"The bent-grass is distinguished by its red colour
above the ten thousand blades of the meadow."
By this verse he enigmatically alluded to the
beauty of his daughter Houngiu. He then took off
the second cup, and pronounced the second verse.
"Red and purple never adorn vulgar garments."
And in this verse he wished allegorically to indi-
cate that his daughter was not to be sued by com-
mon-place pretenders. He then presented the cup,
to Yang Fang, who seemed disposed to pass it
to Gou.
What!" said the latter, " do you want that
the host should play the guest in his own house?"
Yang Fang made a thousand apologies. In the
presence of my father, how should I presume to
take such a liberty ?" said he.
" What say you ?" asked Gou. "Nay, quite the
contrary for you ought to obey the rule he has laid
down."
"Surely, among friends," said Pe, " one ought
not to be so reserved."
Yang, seeing that his son could not escape, im-
mediately interfered. "Come," said he, " you can't
do better than obey."
Yang Fang, no longer without an excuse, rose to
acquit himself of the task. It was very unlucky for
him that, being third in order, he was under the
necessity of putting the word in a sentence three
48
JU-KIAO-LI:
times. Having taken the cup, he said-" The red
flower of the almond tree can be distinguished out
of ten thousand."
" Not very applicable this," thought Pe: "but
he perhaps wishes to point out his extreme youth,
and his views of advancement, by this allusion; if
this be the meaning, it is tolerable enough."
Now came the second cup. Yang Fang had
almost emptied it, and was rubbing his head as if
to squeeze out some thought. He pretended he
had not finished his cup; and after some time an
idea came to his relief. "The imperial river wafts
red leaves ," " he exclaimed.
His father saw nothing ingenious in the quotation
but not wishing to condemn it, and unable to re-
main passive, he affected to smile. Pe was likewise
silent, for it occurred to him that Yang Fang might
be alluding to his pretensions to an alliance. This
notion prevented Pe from observing the emptiness
of the young man, who had in fact let fall the
sentence by the merest chance.
But there was still a third turn; and Yang Fang,
who had really exhausted his whole stock, begged
to be excused, on the score that he could not drink
another drop. But Gou, who had an object in it,
persisted in pressing him. Pe, who sat next him,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
49
likewise exhorted and encouraged him to go on.
Yang Fang, seeing there was no getting over it, took
the cup, and began to con over the verses of all the
poets he had read. The father was extremely mor-
tified at seeing the embarrassment of Yang Fang
he would not on any account venture to suggest a
passage from any book of verses, or from any poet
of the dynasty of Thang, well knowing that his
son would never remember it. The only expe-
dient, therefore, to which he could have re-
course on the occasion was to introduce, as it were
inadvertently, into his conversation, a line from
some obscure poet. Affecting then to resume
the discourse, he began thus,-" Under existing cir-
cumstances, and surrounded as the emperor is
with business, we magistrates, who are obliged
to appear every day at court, have scarcely time to
admire
'The moon o'ercast, the splendour of the stars
and yet nothing is pleasanter than to come and enjoy
one's ease thus, as if in a shady grove-it is the
most agreeable of all recreations."
Yang's object in quoting this line about the
o'ercast moon was to recall to his son's mind a poeti-
cal composition which commenced with this verse :
and he kept his eyes fixed on the young man sig-
nificantly, whilst he uttered the words, in order, if
possible, to make him comprehend his purpose.
Pe and Gou, who could not make out Yang's im-
mediate aim, answered with a suppressed laugh,
" Yes, you are perfectly right."
But Yang Fang, who was struck with the re-
markable expression of his father's countenance,
50
JU-KIAO-LI:
soon discovered that he wanted to give him a hint;
accordingly, during Yang's discourse, the son sud-
denly recovered his recollection, and, quite over-
joyed, emptied his cup, and exclaimed Red
clouds are like the flowers which the king of hea-
sows in handfuls*."
Pe, satisfied so far, could not help saying that it
was very well ; and Yang Fang, quite filled with joy
to be praised by Pe, handed the cup eagerly to
Gou, who, being the last in order, had only one cup
to drink : he took it and said:-" This liquor, which
runs through our veins, is a red jasper become fluid."
Everybody had now gone through his turn. Gou
filled a large cup which he presented to Yang, to
thank him for the word which he had proposed.
Yang took and drank it, and turning towards his
son, said "Poetry is a sublime art, which learned
men cannot hold in too high estimation; but it
often turns out to be an obstacle to advancement.
After a man has made a character for himself by
his services, and when he has succeeded in placing
his fame on a secure foundation, then he may
allow himself indulgence in these amusements;
but young men like you should devote themselves
to studies of a serious kind ; and it is not because
your ancestors, men of illustrious name, excelled
in this art, as they did in everything else, that you
are to suppose that it is in your power to maintain
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
51
the succession of men of their rank. Once let
this notion get possession of the head, and it is
impossible for you to derive any benefit from your
studies. It is the rage of a number of young
men, and it is of the first consequence to warn
you against it ; and now, seigneur Pe, what is your
opinion?"
" Your excellent instructions," said Pe, " are a
mirror for young men; but your son is blessed by
heaven with qualities of so solid a kind, that I am
sure it will not be necessary for you to place any
restraint on his inclinations."
Gou, perceiving that Yang had finished his cup,
wanted to have another round of the play, and was
going to propose it to Yang Fang, when the fa-
ther rose in great apprehension. "It would be
seigneur Pe's turn now," said he; " but really we
have been a long time at the table, and for my part
I require a little respite."
Pe also stood up. Let us take a turn on the
floor," said he ; " and when they have cleared the
table, we can resume our seats."
Gou did not wish to press his company, so he
invited them to walk in a little pavilion, the walls
of which were decorated with inscriptions, and the
staircase ornamented with flowers. It was a remote,
silent spot, where Gou was wont to come to court
repose.
When they had gained the pavilion, the guests
employed themselves for some time in contem-
plating the objects around them. Yang and Pe
went down to the foot of the stairs, while Gou and
Yang Fang remained standing together at one of
52
JU-KIAO-LI
the sides of the pavilion. The latter accidentally
raised his head, and saw over the door an inscrip-
tion in three characters, FE KOU HIAN, pavilion of
inward satisfaction. He read it to himself, and
kept his eyes some time fixed in that direction.
Gou observed him, and said, "These three cha-
racters are the work of Ouiupi; the traces are bold
and firm. It appears that he was an excellent
caligrapher."
Yang Fang, affecting to understand the cha-
racters, said, "Yes, an excellent caligrapher.
The word 'pavilion' is, however, common-place
enough; but the two characters, FE KAO, are
divinely written." Now, in uttering the last word,
he gave to it the vulgar pronunciation, not appear-
ing to be acquainted with the fact, that the inscrip-
tion was taken from a passage in a book of verses,
where, on account of the rhyme, it was absolutely
necessary to pronounce it KOU and not KAO
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
53
This simple word served at once to open Gou's
eyes, and he contented himself with answering
generally, " Yes, you are right."
Pe and Yang now returned ; and after some con-
versation, Gou induced his guests to resume their
seats at the table, and proposed a repetition of the
small play. Yang Fang begged to give up his
turn to Pe. Pe wished that it should remain with
Yang Fang, and neither would yield.
The father, fearful of some unlucky result if the
play proceeded, availed himself of the contentions
now going on. "Well, since your lordship," ad-
dressing Pe, " declines to lead him, do you expect
that my son shall be so indiscreet as to do it ? Is it
not better that we should sit and converse together
But as you like."
" Your advice is very good," said Pe ; " but
you know we must have something to stimulate us
to drink !"
" At the board, with friends around, who is it
that will not get drunk?" exclaimed Yang.
Gou then ordered a large cup for each of his
guests, and the party began to drink and argue
until they mutually perceived the first symptoms of
intoxication. Yang now dreaded that Pe, being
excited, would propose making verses. He there-
fore pretended to be further gone than he really
was, and wanted, at last, to get up and go away
with his son.
54
JU-KIAO-LI
Let us now leave Yang and his son, who took
their leave and departed.
Gou still detained Pe, as he was impatient to
tell him the anecdote about the inscription. "I had
myself observed," said Pe, when he heard it, " the
embarrassment under which he laboured to get
over the three cups; but a mistake like this at
once exposes his ignorance. Well then, in my
opinion, the astrologer is not entitled to the least
credit."
"What!" said Gou, "and have you put any faith
in the words of this conjurer ?-I'll pledge my life
that it is old Yang, who, taken with my niece's
composition the other day, has sent this man to you
with these stories."
" Very likely," said Pe, shaking his head "and,
but for this day's experience, it is not unlikely that
I should have fallen into the net."
After some further conversation on the same
subject, the brothers-in-law separated.
Meanwhile it was Yang's belief that his son had
not betrayed any symptoms of ignorance on this
occasion. "Well then," said he joyfully, "the
alliance is likely to take place; but who shall be
the negotiator? That's an essential point." Then,
after a pause, " This old man is positive and self-
willed. If I send any person of rank to him, he
will say that I only want to shew off my high ac-
quaintances.-No I shall send him Sse Fanghoei
they have been fellow students ; they are friends;
and Pe can have no objection."
His resolution being taken, Yang was proceed-
ing to pay a visit to Sse, when a servant went to call
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
55
him back, telling him that an express had arrived
the evening before, summoning him to attend a
meeting of the chamber of inspectors-general, to
be held that day, and that he would be just in
time. "True," said he, "I forgot;" but he quickly
recollected that Sse would be at this meeting.
He repaired on horseback to the chamber, and
found that several of the inspectors had already ar-
rived, amongst whom he was happy to recognise Sse.
After the usual reverences, the question for delibe-
ration was made known to the assembly. The
reigning emperor desired to despatch to his bro-
ther, who was in captivity in Tartary, some officer to
bear a complimentary message, and also to carry
him some winter clothes. The ministry of the
personal had been delaying for a long time to re-
turn any nomination to his majesty; and hence
the emperor thought fit to issue an imperial pro-
clamation, commanding the presidents of the su-
preme courts, and of the judicial and executive
bodies, to assemble together and deliberate on the
subject. The chamber of the inspectors-general in
particular was instructed to take the case into con-
sideration, and carry up their resolution to the ge-
neral assembly.
As soon as the subject was proposed for discus-
sion, the inspectors-general, each of course being
influenced by personal motives, abstained from
making any proposition. They went in a body to
the general assembly, and making a profound salu-
tation, set forth, that since the imperial message,
which they were considering, had required that the
envoy proceeding to the captive emperor should
,56
JU-KIAO-LI:
repair to the Tartarian camp, it was absolutely ne-
cessary that he should be a person of acknowledged
talent and tried prudence; that he should be pos-
sessed of courage; in a word, that he should be a
consummate character. They further said, there
was reason to apprehend that, in the short interval
they had for deliberation, they were liable to make
an unsatisfactory choice; and that it was expedient
for them, one and all, to return to their homes,
and there meditate seriously on the matter, with a
view of ultimately proposing to the chamber some
person deserving their confidence, whereby their
president would be completely enlightened. The
whole assembly, assenting to the proposal, sepa-
rated.
As soon as the adjournment took place, Yang
mounted his horse, and quickening his pace, soon
eame up with Sse. "I have a little request to
make of you," said he: " I want to go with you to
your house."
" What can it be Why not make it at once ?"
" If it were respecting any other matter, we
could converse upon it as we go along; but it
is of such a nature as requires that I should
accompany you home. It is the most convenient
thing."
They accordingly rode forward, and when they
arrived at Sse's house, they were ushered into a
parlour.
Now," said Sse, "what is it you wish to
communicate
Nothing less than a project of marriage for my
son ; and I want you to interfere in it."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
57
" Why, your son was enrolled last autumn on
the list of licentiates. How is it that he is not yet
married?'
"My son is now twenty my colleagues have
been pressing me with proposals of marriage for
him; but he is positively resolved to marry no one
but a young lady of virtue and talent, and this is the
reason why he is not yet married. When I was at
dinner the other day with your lordship at Pe's,
I discovered that his daughter was a young lady
of great merit and address, from the verses which
she composed in the place of her father. On
my return, I informed my son of what had hap-
pened and he was at once smitten with the de-
sire of being allied to so distinguished a person.
But then I reflected that Pe was a man of a proud,
decisive character ; and I fear, if I send any
other person, that he would not listen to their
proposals. Amongst all my fellow students, there
is nobody but yourself who is intimate with him;
besides, I am anxious to be honoured, I con-
fess, with some testimony of your friendship for
me; and I therefore make bold to request 'your in-
terference. Will you be good enough to undertake
the trouble?"
"In negotiating so very excellent a marriage for
your son, I should be most happy to offer you my
services but you are aware how inflexible Pe is.
Yet if he is disposed to the affair, surely it can
matter little whom you send to speak to him; but
if he is not, it will not be in my power, though I
can boast of being his friend, to incline him to
the match. The grand point in this matter certainly
is, the youth and distinguished merit of your son. It
58
JU-KIAO-LI:
is on that score you can do most with him; I do not
anticipate an unfavourable reception. It is too late
in the day to visit him now ; but to-morrow morn-
ing I shall not fail to comply with your desire ;
and whether I find him disposed one way or the
other, I shall still take care to call and let you
know."
Yang said he was extremely obliged to his friend,
and departed with the usual salutations.
They who do not know the result of Sse's in-
terview, will learn it in the following chapter.
CHAPTER III.
PE, IN THE COURSE OF A DANGEROUS JOURNEY,
MEETS WITH A PROTECTOR FOR HIS DAUGHTER.
" How delightful it is, in the vicissitudes of life, to have the support
of a relation or friend ! Virtue is ever, at last, its own reward. Good
and evil are not distributed capriciously by chance. The best policy in
this world is, never to do a dishonest act."
SSE did not hide from himself the difficulties of the
commission which he had undertaken ; but as he had
now gone too far to recede, he went early the next
morning to visit Pe, before he was up. Sse was
conducted into the library, where Pe, after adjusting
his person in the most careful manner, very soon
joined him.
What can it be that brings the seigneur out
so early this morning ?" was the first question
of Pe.
" Why, a commission which I have got, and an
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
59
application I have to make ; that I think would in-
duce anybody to be out early," said Sse.
" From whom have you received the commission,
and to whom is the application to be made?" in-
quired Pe.
" Yang is the person that gave me the com-
mission, and the application I have to make is
to yourself."
Pe instantly perceived his object. " Now, seig-
neur," said he, "since it is Yang's commission,
and as it is addressed to me, I have only to say,
that upon any subject in the world, except marriage,
I shall be happy to hear you."
Sse burst out laughing, and exclaimed, " You are
absolutely as cunning as a spirit ; you have just hit
it. Old Yang came yesterday to the council to
look for me, and after the sitting he accompanied
me home to state the matter to me. He seems to
entertain the highest opinion of your daughter's
talents, from the verses which we saw the other
night. He has been 80 struck with them that he
longs to have the affair concluded, and has placed
it in my hands. I have been thinking that the pro-
position would not be acceptable to you but he
pressed me so much that it was difficult for me to
refuse him point blank, and I could not avoid having
this interview with you. You may consent or not : I
shall take your decision, whatever it is, and never
trouble you on the subject again."
"I was very near having been his dupe in this
affair," said Pe.
" How is that ?" asked Sse.
Pe then recounted the story of the astrologer's
visit, the dinner at Gou's, and the anecdote about
60
JU-KIAO-LI:
the inscription.
"
Had my brother-in-law and
I,"
he
continued,
been less on the alert, how
would it have been possible for us to avoid the
net?"
"I am intimately acquainted with the whole
history of his son," said Sse. "It was Louwen-
ming, the under-governor of Kinkhi, that received
this young man into the second section at the ex-
amination for poetry. Yang, on some former oc-
casion, acted the friend of this man when he was
near being denounced by the examiner-general
of Kiangsi ; and to repay the obligation, he shewed
favour to Yang's son in his examination; and
very lately old Yang wanted to get promotion for
this Lou. You see very well that his son has no
kind of merit. Why should he think of uniting
himself with your daughter?"
" Say no more about it; do you return, and
simply tell him that I do not accept his proposal."
" It is just what I expected," said Sse. After
having breakfasted with Pe, he left him, and pro-
ceeded straight to the house of Yang.
He was met by old Yang, who hastily exclaimed,
" A thousand thanks for the trouble you have been
taking; I do not know how I can shew my gratitude
to you."
"My trouble has been fruitless," observed Sse;
but I trust you will not take it amiss."
" What ! has Pe refused my proposal?" inquired
Yang.
"I went to-day to see seigneur Pe, and commu-
nicated to him the commission with which you
intrusted me; he answered me that he was per-
fectly disposed to meet your wishes, but that the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
61
eminent talents of your son, and the inferior de-
gree of merit of his daughter, would make this a
disproportionate sort of alliance. He observed, in
the next place, that being without a son, he and
his daughter had been a long time accustomed to
each other's society; and that your native province
being so very remote, he would find it very diffi-
cult to bear a separation from her; in fine, that his
daughter was rather young, and he would prefer
postponing her marriage for awhile. Such were
the grounds on which he declined accepting your
proposal."
" All mere pretexts," said Yang; " but I can
see into his mind: he looks upon my small for-
tune, and the inferiority of my office, with con-
tempt. My family appears to be unworthy of an
alliance with is;-but he has declined the pro-
posal : very well, let us say no more about it.
My son is a person of ordinary merit only, but
he shall not want a wife on that account. Pe's
daughter is sixteen, not so young neither. Kiangsi
is a very remote province; but does he meditate
keeping his daugbter at home all her life'? How-
ever, I know the sort of person he wishes to give her
to ; some poet, no doubt."
" Do not be angry," said Sse. " Pe's attachment
to his daughter is the cause of his refusal; perhaps
something of the failure is to be imputed to my
want of address and power of persuasion. Perhaps
he will accede when too late ; who knows but he
will revise his determination before long? Now,
as you proposed for a virtuous and accomplished
girl for your son, there is no reason why you
62
JU-KIAO-LI:
should not, after an' interval, make use of some
other mediator."
" Why, since the proposal of which you have been
the bearer has not been listened to, whom else can
I employ? Let there be an end of it; I have made
the first advance; he has refused but the affairs of
this world are subject to change who knows but a
time will arrive when it is he that will solicit me
All I am sorry for is, sir, that you should have
so much trouble and inconvenience."
Sse observed that Yang was very much hurt.
My efforts," said he, "have been unavailing the
obstinacy of this old man has led him away; and
when I saw that nothing was to be done, I was
obliged to leave him but another opportunity may
be easily had of returning to the charge."
I have put you to a great deal of trouble," said
Yang, "and I thank you very much."
Sse then took his leave and departed, leaving
Yang to his meditations.
"The old wretch!" thought the latter. " If he
had not intended to accept my proposal, what was
the use of having my son and myself invited, some
days ago, to Gou's? He wanted, I see, just to make
fools of us. He stands upon his great knowledge,
and shews his arrogance before me. I did not want
to embroil myself with him, because ne was my
fellow student. Even on the very day when we
dined with him, and were making verses on the
queen marguerites, how often did he shew his tem-
per ! I bore patiently with him; and now I am the
first to broach the project of an alliance with him.
I do not know that I disgrace him so much by the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
63
offer. What can be his motive ? But only let me
have an opportunity of paying him back his trick,
and then he shall know my resentment. Let me
see."-(After a pause)-" I have it. The other day,
when I mentioned the difficulty there was to get a
proper person who would undertake the delicate
mission to the captive emperor, Pe answered me
scornfully, that he could not have the heart of a man
who would find any such difficulty in the task.
Now the reigning emperor has ordered our chamber
to take the matter into consideration, and propose
some one. I have not thought of any person yet;
what is to prevent me from nominating Pe? Surely
he that has the heart of a man will have no objection
to make a tour into Tartary; then, as he has got no
son, we shall see who it is that is to be intrusted
with the guardianship of this young and amiable
daughter. It is not improbable that he will then
beg of me to renew my proposal, but it will be too
late."
Having come to this resolution, Yang drew up a
note, in which he represented that the master of
the ceremonies, Pe Hiouan, was an officer to whom
age had brought experience; that he was a man of
distinguished talent and tried courage; that if he
were selected to undertake the mission to the cap-
tive emperor, he would do honour to the trust; and
finally, it was requested, if not better advised, that
the emperor would be so good as to confer the ap-
pointment upon him. Yang deposited, secretly,
this note in the chamber of inspectors and as very
great difficulty was felt in discovering a proper per-
son hitherto, the proposition contained in this note
was received with the greatest satisfaction.
64
JU-KIAO-LI:
It so happened that the six directors-general were
going to present to the general assembly the envoy
of the state of Lichi. The assembly received the
two presentations, and hastened to lay them before
the sovereign for his approbation.
Next day an imperial decree had invested the two
magistrates so nominated with the rank of first
and second envoy extraordinary to the captive
emperor, to inquire after his health, and to make
a treaty of peace with the Tartars. They were di-
rected to proceed in five days; and the promotions
and rewards which were due to their merits, were
postponed until their return.
A copy of the decree was despatched to Pe. As
soon as he read it, he exclaimed, " Who can it be
that has brought me into so dangerous a commis-
sion ? It can be nobody else," he said, after a
pause, "than Yang that old knave who, on ac-
count of my refusal the other day, is become my
enemy. However, though it is out of malice that I
am involved in so dangerous a matter, still I am to
remember that at this very hour the emperor is a
captive amongst a set of barbarians. I, who am
his liege subject, should not hesitate surely to go
and inquire about his health; if I can avail myself
of the occasion to enter into a treaty of peace, set
the emperor at liberty, and, in short, perform the
obligations of a faithful subject, I shall not then
have been altogether useless to my country. But
then this journey into Tartary is a sort of under-
taking, the consequences of which cannot be imme-
diately seen : the term of my absence is quite uncer-
tain; and my poor Houngiu, how can she remain
alone This knavish old Yang has well presumed
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
65
to injure me in this way ; for, when I am gone, he
will take care to raise the tempest and trouble the
waves; and then nothing will be able to hinder him
from getting her into his accursed hands."
At this moment Sse was announced, and Pe
eagerly went to meet him. Is it possible," ex-
claimed Sse, as soon as the first salutations were
over, ' is it possible, that because the other day
you declined his proposal of marriage, he could
have gone, without my privity, to give in your
name to the chamber ? The decree was issued
this morning ; and the very moment I saw it, I
went to him; but he pretended not to be at home.
As I could do nothing in that quarter, I prevailed
on some of my colleagues to come with me to the
house of seigneur Wang, and related to him the
whole affair of the proposal and your refusing, and
the trick which Yang had just played you. Wang
appeared not a little astonished at the details, but
said that as the decree was issued, there was no
probability of recalling it, unless you could send
in a petition pleading illness ; in that case the
chamber would sit again and choose some other
person. There was no other way, he said, of get-
ting out of the perplexity. This is what brings me
now ; you must take a speedy step ; there is no time
to lose."
" I am very much obliged to you for your kind-
ness ; but although it was old Yang that involved
me in this dangerous business, the decree having
been issued, the appointment is altogether the em-
peror's business. How can any man in office re-
fuse a commission that is imposed upon him ? If
I pretended illness now, I should not only be guilty
66
JU-KIAO-LI:
of an act inconsistent with my duty and my charac-
ter, but I should draw upon me even the ridicule of
old Yang."
"There is sense and reason in what you say; but
then you are at a time of life when you will scarcely
be able to endure the severity of a savage climate,
and the fatigues of so long a journey beyond the
boundaries of the empire."
"The emperor is in the midst of danger, and his
only place of shelter a wretched hut; should the
humblest of his subjects, then, presume to talk of
fatigue?'
Sse was affected by these expressions. "Your
heart," said he, " is all devotion and fidelity; it is
of the very essence of the genii. But as to old Yang,
unworthy brute as he is, he is not the only person
to blame in this business : we who have contem-
plated you as a man possessing only the heart of
a vulgar being yes, we deserve to share the indig-
nation which Yang's conduct inspires. An excellent
friend is maliciously forced upon a dangerous
journey. We are afflicted at it, but know not how
to prevent it. What's to be done ! What's to be
done !"
Pe, with no less emotion, answered, "You shew
all the tenderness of a relation, and I must be
insensible as a tree or weed not to be affected
by your friendship; but after having devoted a
life to the study of what I ought to do, can I
turn to the right or the left, and be wanting to
myself ? If I were to allow the storm to depress
me, and to regulate my feelings of loyalty by
a sense of danger in exercising it, in what respect
should I be above Yang?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
67
" Your sentiments are noble, and your resolution
is worthy of you. How few of us are like you ! But
the good man is always under the protection of
heaven; do not be cast down-you will overcome
the danger. own I have not this elevated charac-
ter, but I feel that it becomes me to avoid the com-
pany of men so depraved; besides, the capital is too
dangerous a place of residence; and when you shall
have departed, it will be my care to obtain employ-
ment in some distant quarter."
" Whatever commission you solicit, it will be the
same elsewhere as it is here," said Pe; and he re-
quested Sse to go into the library with him ; but
the latter declined.
"No, not at this moment, when you have so little
time to lose." He immediately rose and took his
leave.
Pe now went to an inner apartment, in order to
communicate these events to his daughter. As soon
as Houngiu heard what had happened, she was
filled with grief; her countenance assumed the pale-
ness of death, and, bursting into tears, she said,
Can it be ; can it be? Can I be the cause of all
this misery to my father ? I have heard that the
poor prisoners made captive in the deserts of Tar-
tary, undergo there the severest cold, and that they
are still worse off when the snow and sleet block up
the roads. A man in the prime of life could scarcely
endure such a journey; but mv father, at your age,
how is it possible for you to undertake it ? I see
how it is : Yang, that wicked old man, because this
marriage was declined, has involved you in this
dreadful business ; but, dear father, why cannot
you petition the emperor, lay open the whole history
68
JU-KIAO-LI:
of this business, feign illness, and send in your re-
signation ? His majesty will perhaps have compas-
sion on you."
"Sse has been just here and proposed the very
same thing; he told the whole at'court. He wanted
me to write a petition and affect illness, and told
me that he would undertake to free me; but I re-
flected that on this event now depends my whole
character. If I feign illness, no doubt those in the
secret will be aware that it is Yang's revenge that
has brought me into the predicament; but those who
do not know the circumstances will suppose that it
is an evasion. When I was persecuted by Wangt-
chin, I threw up my employment and retired into
solitude, and on that account I won general re-
spect, and, finally, received my present office. I
re-engaged in public affairs; and at the moment
when dangers are impending over the state, and when
there is a necessity for sending ambassadors out of
the country, am I to turn coward and give in my
resignation ? Am I to play the double-faced knave,
or shew a tiger's head and a serpent's tail ? Am I to
be the sport of eternal ridicule ? What ! is it pos-
sible I could act so?"
His daughter wiped away her tears. "Your sen-
timents are right," said she: "my father and I do
not think that to pursue such a course would
become a virtuous magistrate; but at the same
time I am your daughter, and I know that this
expedition to the northern frontier will expose you
in your old age to the severity of a barbarous cli-
mate; that your life will be endangered amongst a
savage race, accustomed like the wolves to a life
of violence and murder. So little regard have they
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
69
for the middle empire , that they can scarcely tell
if the emperor be living or dead ; how then will
they behave to an humble envoy? Oh, my dear fa- -
ther, you have fallen into the tiger's mouth-what a
dreadful reflection"
"Yesian is barbarous in nothing but the name
although of Tartary, he is acquainted with the laws
of justice and of courtesy. He knows that the empire
is governed by a regent, and more than once has he
shewn regret for the injury he has done us; besides
this, the emperor has so impressed them with the
greatness of his character, that the Tartars would
not be inclined to add to the horror of his captivity.
There has just arrived from the north an envoy to
negotiate a peace, and apparently with sincere in-
tentions of establishing it. I am the ambassador
sent to carry back the answer to their propositions.
The same rules are observed amongst them which
are in force with us, and they will not be certainly
disposed to fix on this occasion to perpetrate fresh
excesses. But my poor Houngiu, will you remain
behind me alone, at your age, at the mercy of an
old knave like Yang? His scheme is not dropt ;
new plots will be got up ; how can I have an easy
mind ?"
" You are one of the first magistrates of the
empire, father; you are sent on an embassy by your
sovereign; your family being here, your doors all
closed, what harm can he effect ? Let him do his
worst."
" The heart of a wicked man is like a demon, or
70
JU-KIAO-LI:
the Ju ; you cannot judge of it according to com-
mon notions; so that if you remain here, I can never
be free from anxiety. Better for you to go back; and
if you do not like the length of the road, you can
stop at Chantoung with your aunt Lo. I shall then
proceed with an easy mind."
One or the other course is equally good, but
in either case the road is very long; and if Yang
finds out that I am gone to the south, he may
wickedly and imprudently despatch some of his
people after me, and no doubt raise some disturbance
on the road that will have the effect. of making
me return, or undertake some other dangerous
course. But a notion suggests itself to me; let the
door of your house be shut as usual, to all appear-
ance as if you left your family at home; whilst-I can
set out secretly for my uncle's. Thus all will be
secure, and your Houngiu will have an opportunity
of hearing constantly about her father."
Pe approved of the design ; and as he was about
to send a person to Gou's, with a view to carry it
into effect, the doctor himself called, and was im-
mediately shewn in. Pe requested him to enter the
inner apartment, and asked Houngiu to go with him
to meet her uncle.
" As I did not stir out these two days," said
Gow, "I heard not one word of the affair until a
few minutes ago, being at the office. I was asto-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
71
nished when I saw the decree. And is it possible
that Yang can be this "dangerous person ?"
" It all proceeds from a little piece of verse," said
Pe: " that is the root of the mischief; but, after all,
this journey in itself is not a thing to be so much
regretted my daughter and I have just been talking
together; and it is on her account alone, a weak and
unprotected girl, that I feel any uneasiness."
"I should have thought that the severe climate
of the country beyond the frontiers would have
inspired you with apprehensions; but since your
courage is equal to the task, your undertaking it
will be a source of glorious recollection to all of us
during the rest of our lives ; and as for my niece,
what have you to fear for her whilst I am here ?
You can set out with an easy mind. I am sure I can
be confided in."
This gave Pe great pleasure. "This moment my
daughter and I were conferring together, and her
suggestions exactly corresponded with your offer
but I have still some apprehension from the extra-
ordinary malice of Yang. I know that, when I am
gone, he will recommence his plots and though
I confide my daughter to your care with security,
yet I am afraid of involving you in some danger;
but since you have shewn so much kindness, I
shall forget all my fears, and set out with a mind at
rest."
Let Yang be never so badly disposed," said
Gou, ' yet this is the daughter of one of the prin-
cipal magistrates of the empire. How could he
presume then to violate the laws of society, especially
when I am on the spot ?"
"
Now, father," said Houngiu, "that my uncle
72
JUKIAO-LI:
promises his protection, surely you can have no
anxiety ; you will therefore form your determination
with respect to this journey."
" Knowing in whose hands I place you during my
absence," said Pe, smiling, " 'my course will very
soon be taken. If, during this expedition to the
north, my person shall be in danger, it is my tongue
that is the cause of it. The time fixed by the em-
peror for my departure, is within five days and,
willing or not, to-day or to-morrow I must de-
part. But go and order dinner; your uncle and I
must have a cup or two together, to prepare us
for a separation."
Houngiu accordingly went to see that a light
repast was provided for her father and uncle. Pe
made her sit near him, and after a few cups sighed
heavily, and said, "How much misery is it in the
power of a wretch to inflict upon a good man ! Now
I am happy, drinking at my ease, in the presence
of my brother and my daughter to-morrow I shall
be on horseback, traversing the sandy desert, with-
out being able to tell in what quarter of the world
I am to live or die. When we think of this atten-
tively, we must come to the conclusion that it is the
wicked part of mankind that are sent to punish our
offences."
"Doubtless," said Gou, " a wretch can sport
with the fortunes of the best of men ; but ultimate
happiness is granted by heaven only to the virtuous
man. This expedition to a terrible climate is cer-
tainly a calamity which you could not avoid but
then it is an opportunity by means of which the
talents and virtues of a good man will be made
celebrated; it will shew to the world that you are
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
73
not one of those magistrates that have an eye to
profit alone, and can change with circumstances."
"I entirely agree with what has just fallen from
you," said Pe; " but it is sufficient to make me un-
happy, to reflect, that in my old age, deprived of a
son, and with only this poor girl, we should still
be exposed to the storm. I am certainly consoled
in having such a person as you are to protect her ;
but the mirror of jasper is not yet put in use ; my
daughter is not yet married ; and I confess, that
when I think of this, my attachment almost over-
comes the heroic feelings with which I ought now
to be animated."
Poor Houngiu, who was seated by the side of
her parent, wept incessantly ; his soothing lan-
guage only increased her affliction. " Oh, my
father," she cried, "it is your parental attachment
to your daughter that has brought you into this
miserable plight, and still your only thought is
about her. It is I that deserve to suffer all the
sorrows that agitate your heart; my crime ascends
to heaven; would that I could die and rid you of
all the miseries which I bring upon you ! But,
again, my death would but only increase them; and
then, when you revisited this place, no more would
Houngiu be at your side to attend you, and be the
object of affection in your declining days. A
thousand opposite thoughts rend my heart : now
that my uncle takes me under his protection, I feel
as if I were once more blessed with the presence
of my mother. Compose yourself then; your
strength will be equal to the journey; and after
having worn out your life in your prince's service,
you will come back to our village. But I entreat
74
JU-KIAO-LI:
of you, dear father, to give yourself no more trou-
ble about me-I am yet young enough-the season
of marriage is not gone by-wherefore should you
be in such a hurry My father, if you thus
afflict yourself on my account, what is to become
of me?"
Whilst they were conversing, Pe repeatedly ap-
plied himself to the cup. He was very much af-
flicted ; and his emotions became excessive, as soon
as he observed the grief of his daughter, Amidst
the tears which coursed down his cheeks, he said,
"In the time of the dynasty of Han, Souwou was
sent ambassador to the Huns he was obliged to
remain nineteen years, and by the time that he was
able to return, his beard and hair were all white.
Then, under the dynasty of Soung, Foupi went to
Catai to treat of peace and his detention there was
so protracted, that on his return he found no trace
of his family. I fear that the author of our
disgrace intends to bring about some such issue as
that which awaited the fortunes of these illustri-
ous men. I can boast but of little merit; but I
have devoted my life to the study of the ancients ;
I have, for the period of a half generation, served
the emperor in quality of a magistrate ; and now I
leave this in obedience to his order. Why should I
not imitate the conduct of these virtuous men ?
Why should I betray the weakness of a girl ?
Your father, Houngiu, abandoned solitude to come
here, for no other end than that he might find an
opportunity of procuring for you a suitable esta-
blishment; and little did he foresee that before
his wishes would be accomplished in that respect,
he would have fallen into the snares of a traitor.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
75
Since the moment you lost your mother, at eleven
years of age, have you been for an hour, for even
a minute, absent from my knees ? But now that all
on a sudden I must leave you, and take a long
journey, my heart should be made of iron or stone,
not to be melted with sorrow. To-morrow, when
abroad on my journey, I shall surrender myself ab-
solutely to the service of his majesty and I must
merge these considerations in the sense of my
political obligations."
"Doubtless," observed Gou, it is a very painful
thing for father and daughter to be thus separated ;
but since it must be so, we cannot help it. My
brother, you hold the rank of a high magistrate
my niece is skilled in letters, and knows how to
uphold the dignity of her sex. In acting the part
of the illustrious captive of Tsou, you may hear,
perhaps, that Yang has not yet renounced his pre-
tensions; but from the moment you intrust Houn-
giu to my care, from that moment she ceases to be
my niece, and becomes my daughter and if I can
find a husband worthy of her, depend on my com-
plying with your orders."
This consolatory language made such an impres-
sion on Pe, that he hastened to dry his eyes, and
his features resumed their wonted serenity. "My
brother," he said, " You have taken the thorn from
my heart; and since you promise to procure a suit-
able husband for my daughter I am satisfied, and
shall contentedly meet even death in the deserts of
Tartary.-Then, Houngiu, to-morrow you go to your
uncle's : the names of niece and uncle shall hence-
forth give way to the more endearing appellations
76
JU-KIAO-LI :
between you of father and daughter; it is by this
relation that he will be able to effect a suitable
match for you."
Houngiu would have replied but fearing that
she would but add to her father's emotion, she re-
mained silent; and it was only after some time
that she allowed herself to say, " I respectfully re-
ceive the commands of my father."
The party continued at the table some time, and
the evening now setting in, the servants lighted
the lanterns. Gou drank some more cups, and
then took his leave for the night.
Next morning, Pe had scarcely risen, when seig-
neur Tchang, of the ministry of the personal, was
announced. Pe, remembering that the person was a
counsellor of the senior class, charged with the nomi-
nations to civil employments, and that he was a coun-
tryman of Yang's, concluded that he came on some
errand connected with the latter. He went out to meet
the visitor, when a great many compliments and
ceremonies passed between them. As soon as they
were seated, the servants brought tea; after which,
Tchang opened the conversation.
" Your excellency was yesterday promoted to a
splendid trust, but nevertheless one which in-
volves the necessity of making a long journey.
This has been effected by the recommendations
of two offices our department having nothing to
do with it."
"Being but an humble man of letters, "said Pe,
" without skill or knowledge, I should have long ago
asked permission to resign, by reason of my infir-
mities. I yesterday received the emperor's com-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
77
mands, not knowing who it was that recommended
so very unworthy a person as myself to the confi-
dence of his majesty."
"Do you inquire who it was that recommended
you?"
"I do not know who it was."
" It was no other than your fellow student Yang-
Tseuhian."
06 If it were he, he must know my want of
ability. Why should he carry his kindness to me
so far ? His friendship really overpowers me. All
I fear is, that if on this occasion I disappoint the
hopes which are entertained of me, it will not re-
flect much credit on Yang's recommendation."
" I knew nothing whatever of that the em-
peror, however, has given orders to our ministry
to consider the matter, and it is within my depart-
ment. Yang has told me all that took place; I was
aware that I could not have the honour of seeing
you, except this day; and now I beg of you to in-
form me if you really have a desire to perform this
journey, or entertain a repugnance to it, and are
disposed not to go."
" How can your excellency speak thus? I am
in the employment of the emperor, and if he com-
mands me to set out, either to the north or to the
south, to the east or to the west, it is his command
and must be obeyed; there is therefore no wish or
repugnance in the matter."
"I admire your disinterestedness, but it is the
esteem I have for you that brings me here. You
may open your heart to me, sir, and lay aside these
unnecessary evasions."
"Then," said Pe, " I shall certainly not conceal
78
JU-KIAO-LI :
my sentiments; but I ask of your excellency again
to inform me what it is you mean by this allusion to
any possible wish or repugnance that I can enter-
tain upon this occasion."
" If you are inclined to the journey," answered
Tchang, "we need say no more; you will receive
your letters to-morrow, and can take your depar-
ture. But in case you desire to stay at home, I
am here to speak to your excellency with confidence.
I now tell you that all this is the result of the re-
fusal you have given to seigneur Yang; it is he
that has effected all; and to use a vulgar expres-
sion, the hand that ties the bell, can untie it again.'
But, in short, I am happy to tell you, that I am in-
trusted by him to arrange matters, only let your ex-
cellency once consent to this marriage : then we
shall get a substitute for you, and you need not
go. Besides, you must know that there is nothing
in this alliance but what is perfectly unexception-
able. You and Yang have been fellow-students,
you are equal in point of property, and you
ought really to consider these matters atten-
tively."
Pe laughed. " I was not aware," said he, " that
my fellow student had so very long an arm."
" Although seigneur Yang holds a very high
official situation," said Tchang, "still it is his very
confidential intimacy with the viceroy Chi, and his
friendly intercourse with Wang, one of the con-
nexions of the imperial family, that enable him
to move so many cords at court. Then Tchin
and Wang take everything for granted that
Yang tells them. Now, sir, remember you are
here in office; you want each other's assistance,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
79
and it is impolitic in you to offend him ; besides,
it is he that makes the offer in this alliance.
The match is exceedingly advantageous, and you
should not be prevented from carrying it into
effect."
"True," said Pe: " I am here in office and the
counsels your excellency gives me are incompa-
rable; they are better than gold or jasper. But un-
fortunately, I am of an unambitious turn, and indif-
ferent to honours. Let me keep my situation or
lose it, I am not prone to solicit the patronage of
powerful men. It is true that the idea of this
journey originated with Yang; but ultimately the
emperor caused his wish to be proclaimed on the
subject: I am a magistrate in his royal service ; I
have received his commands, and I go. Whether
or not seigneur Yang was actuated by a regard
to the public interests, or by private motives,
I do not trouble myself to inquire; and as
to the proposed marriage, it is an honour, sir,
which so humble a magistrate cannot think of ac-
cepting."
" Since your excellency esteems so little your
employments, you would do well to think, at least,
of avoiding the calamities that will be consequent
upon this resolution of yours. To say nothing of the
dangers attending a journey amidst so barbarous a
people, you will find it very difficult to conclude a
peace with the enemy; and even if you do succeed
in that, there is still a more embarrassing task,
namely, to effect the liberation of the captive em-
peror; but even let him return or not, you may
depend on it, that the very best services you
may have rendered on this occasion will, from the
80
JU-KIAO-LI :
mouths of courtiers, be represented as the black-
est crimes. Then again, your daughter, a young and
utterly defenceless creature, must remain behind
you. The leopard's glance penetrates far; how
will she be able to protect herself from what may
happen ?"
Pe turned pale. "There is a saying of one of
the ancients," said he " to this effect-' As long as
my enemy exists, what shall become of my family?'
Well, well-life and death, happiness and misfor-
tune, are under the guidance of heaven, and we
have only to submit to destiny. Now that I have
received the order to repair to Tartary, what have
I to think of beyond that ? What have I to do
with the questions of services or crimes or what
matters it, that I have a weak defenceless daugh-
ter ? Yes, they may take my head, if it please
them ; but I am to be frightened by no man
living."
"I only come to do you a service, as I thought,"
replied Tchang. "I was not aware that your de-
termination was fixed; I only fear that I have acted
indiscreetly." He then rose and took his leave;
Pe conducting him beyond the great door of the
house.
Pe returned to his apartment, and gave himself
up more than ever to melancholy reflections.
"Yes," said he, "I see it is true that it is all a
trick of that old knave Yang: and yet he sends
me official persons to awe me by their authority.
He pursues me sword in hand to effect this marriage.
And is it possible that any one can be so perverse
But if I were now to go and provoke an open quar-
rel with him, all the world would say that I have
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
81
not courage for the journey into Tartary. I shall
find time for revenge after my return; but now,
without delay, let me put my daughter in safety."
He then despatched a note to Dr Gou, to ap-
prize him of his intention to call on him. He next
sought his daughter. "This old knave Yang,"
said he to her, "is a person of the most won-
derful perversity, and it is absolutely necessary
to lose no time in placing you in a state of security
from him : but it is essential that no suspicion
should be entertained of my leaving the house
now: quick, and get ready some clothes and this
night I shall conduct you to your uncle's."
Houngiu did as she was ordered, and made the
necessary preparations without delay. As soon as
it was night, Pe ordered two sedans to be brought
in the most secret manner possible; and having
placed his daughter in one, and taking the other
himself, they proceeded in this manner to Gou's
residence.
Gou had already caused a trusty person to be on
the watch against their arrival, in order to let them
in by the back entrance. Pe now desired his
daughter to make four reverences to his brother-in-
law and having performed his salutations in the
same manner himself, he said to his host-"I now
place in your hands the most precious possession
I have in this world."
" Fear nothing, my brother," said Gou: I shall
prove myself worthy of the trust."
Houngiu's heart was ready to break, but she
concealed her tears, and held down her head in
silence. Gou proposed to keep Pe to supper, but
the latter excused himself.
82
JU-KIAO-LI:
"I dare not even sit down," said he, 'lest any
person should call to know if I am here. Now,
Houngiu," said he, "your father is about to leave you,
and heaven only knows when we shall meet again."
He was about to go, but his daughter, in a trans-
port of sorrow, still held him to perform the four
reverences. Having acquitted herself of this duty,
she sobbed violently, and her tears flowed afresh.
Pe wept also, nor could Gou, who was standing by,
repress his emotions. At length the father and
daughter tore themselves from each other without
a word.
Pe, for a time after his return home, continued to
give vent to his grief; but he felt consoled in hav-
ing provided so well for his daughter's safety and
having taken some refreshment, he retired, and slept
until morning. His first care next day was to ob-
tain his credentials at the proper office. He then
formally gave the house into the care of his servants,
ordering them to keep the door fast, and enjoining
them to say that their young mistress was there.
He caused two intelligent attendants to accom-
pany him outside the city. After having bid adieu
to the court, and arranged his luggage, he pro-
ceeded to the post-house, and there waited for
Lichi, the principal envoy, with whom he was to set
out. Pe, as filling one of the nine offices of the
master of the ceremonies, should properly have
been invested with the title of first envoy, and
Lichi, who was but a state messenger, should have
the second place but the course which Pe had
adopted the evening before towards Tchang, an
officer of the ministry of the personal, had given
him offence; and to avenge himself, he arranged
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
83
that Lichi should have the title of counsellor to the
ministry of ceremonies, together with that of first
envoy; and that Pe should have an inferior title,
namely, that of counsellor to public works, with the
quality of second envoy ; nevertheless Pe was not
much annoyed by this arrangement.
At that time it was a pretty general custom that
the officers who set out on any mission should re-
ceive at their departure two sorts of parting feast-
the one provided at the expense of the state, the
other furnished by private individuals. Those who
assembled on such an occasion, spent two days in
a species of revelry, which was inseparable from
those entertainments.
After this custom had been complied with, Pe
and Lichi set out for the north.
Now Yang's object, from the beginning, was to
embarrass Pe, so as to compel him to have re-
course to his own assistance, in order to get out of
the difficulty, and thus, ultimately, to force him
into the alliance which had been proposed to him.
He had not foreseen that the inflexible character
of Pe would induce him to prefer undergoing the
risks of the mission, rather than make any com-
promise on this point ; but when he found that
the affair took a different course, he began to re-
flect.
" Here is a disappointment," said he; "and
when old Pe comes back, after the trick I have
played him, we cannot see each other. It is a vulgar
saying If you don't knock down with one blow,
dont't fail to give two.' The best thing I can do is
to take advantage of his absence, and to strain every
nerve in order that the marriage may be effected,
84
JU-KIAO-LI
one way or another, before his return. We shall
then be relations. Let his passion be never so
furious, he can do nothing. Let us just see how
we can bring it about?"
After a moment's deliberation, he said, "I have
it. A few days ago Tchang and Sse both under-
took the office of mediator. Though he refused
both of them, I have only to request them to say
that they have had a verbal promise from him.
I shall send Yang Fang to Wangtsiouan's to choose
a lucky day for the celebration of the marriage
at his house ; and as old Pe is not on the spot,
who is there to interfere ?"
When his project was thus framed, he forthwith
set out privately to impart it to Tchang, who was a
person of similar character with Yang. He con-
sented to everything, and undertook himself to have
an interview with Sse, with a view of prevailing on
him to accede to whatever would be asked of him
to do. Sse wanted neither to decline nor agree
positively, and spoke rather ambiguously.
It happened at this time that the inspectorship of
the province Houkoueng was vacant. Sse solicited
it privately from the president of the chamber, and
having succeeded, he made preparations for set-
ting out.
As soon as Dr Gou was informed of the de-
parture of Sse, he immediately ordered a repast
outside the town for the occasion. "Seigneur Sse,"
said he, "how does it happen that you have been
so suddenly promoted, and that you are in so great
a hurry to depart?"
Sse sighed, and then said, "To any other per-
son than yourself, I should hesitate to explain
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
85
myself ; but your excellency is no stranger, and
there is no reason why I should affect concealment."
He then related to him how Yang wanted.to make
Tchang and himself act the part of mediators in the
violent proceeding which he had projected, and how
he wished, by means of his son, to induce Wangt-
siouan to get the court on his side. "You know
very well that I did not wish to serve him in this
matter ; but Pe is gone, and who is it now that
would dare to confess himself the opponent of Yang?
This is the motive that has led me to seek this mis-
sion. I had no other means of getting rid of his
persecution."
What," said Gou; "and are things come to
this pass
But here several persons came up to accompany
the travellers. Sse could not drink more than
four or five cups, when he rose and set off.
In the mean time Gou returned home full of un-
pleasant reflections. "Since this old knave Yang
is capable of such wicked conduct," said he to him-
self, "and as he has so many powerful friends at
court, he need only ask an authority from the em-
peror to make the minutest search. My niece is
at present in my house, and I do not fear him; but
it will be necessary to oppose him; and after all the
injunctions I have received from Pe Thaihiouan, if
I neglect the most trivial precaution, repentance
will be of little use to me. Sse's course is by far the
safest. I can do nothing better than obtain leave
to-morrow morning to set off before any mischief
can be done."
And he accordingly made his application next
day to the college of doctors at the academy, which,
86
JU-KIAO-LI:
fortunately, is never very particular; and as, at this
very time, their literary labours were not very con-
siderable, Gou found it easy to obtain their per-
mission to depart. He next procured a passport;
and taking with him some attendants, he chose
a lucky day, and sent his household outside the
city.
Gou originally brought to the capital with him
only one female of the second rank. On the pre-
sent occasion she accompanied Houngiu, the one
under the character of his wife, the other as his
daughter. The servants did not exceed ten persons,
men and women. He himself left the city at an
early hour, without any one being aware of his de-
parture.
The further adventures of Dr Gou, the academi-
cian, may be seen in the following chapter.
CHAPTER IV.
DOCTOR GOU DISCOVERS A POET IN A SHRUBBERY.
" Fine talents are as precious as gold. Why do we fatigue ourselves in
searching every where for this metal ? The sword of true temper is
known by its brightness. The tyre is not less pleasing in the midst of
dark shades."
WE have just seen how Gou, in order to avoid the
machinations of Yang, had secretly conducted his
niece outside the capital. He flattered himself that
he had thus escaped the leopard's mouth. By
easy journies they safely arrived, in less than a
month, at his place at Nanking.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
87
Gou had himself a daughter, whose name was
Wouyan
She had attained her seventeenth year,
and was of course one year the senior of her cousin
Houngiu. Although she had been betrothed, she
had not yet left her father's house ; and for the
daughter of so distinguished a person, her merit
was not of a superior order.
Gou, who was wholly bent on the fulfilment of his
trust, began to be uneasy lest Yang should still
carry on his inquiries. He proposed that Houngiu
should assume the name of Woukiaot, and pass as
her younger sister. All his people were, accordingly,
enjoined to speak of them as the elder and the
younger, and they were strictly forbidden from
mentioning the name of Pe.
It was almost the middle of winter when the party
arrived at Gou's. The time was spent in visits and
entertainments, which were absolutely unavoid-
able.
The days passed by imperceptibly until the first
approach of spring. Gou now began to think in-
tently on the propriety of looking out for a husband
for Woukiao (Houngiu); but his most sedulous in-
quiries in the city failed to bring any pleasant
tidings to him on this interesting subject.
One day several magistrates from Nanking made
a party together to the temple of the Valley of Im-
mortals, to see the plum-trees in blossom. This
was a favourite pastime of the inhabitants of
Nanking. For several miles before you reached
the temple, the road was planted on either side with
88
JU-KIAO-LI:
plum-trees, some with white blossoms, others with
red blossoms, and the air was impregnated with the
strong perfume which they yielded. Within the
temple, the close bowers were beginning to put on
leaves and flowers ; and every spring the walks were
crowded with poets.
On the occasion just mentioned, Gou formed one
of the party. They first proceeded to the interior
of the temple, to admire the flowers, which were in
abundance.
An old poet, named Kaokiti, had composed two
pieces to celebrate the beauty of the plum-tree blos-
som, which are literally rendered as follows:-
" Thou ruby, worthy to be the ornament of a
throne, who is he that has planted thee everywhere
in the province of Nanking? Whilst the scholar
betakes him to the snow-covered mountain, the
damsel comes by moonlight to wander amongst these
thickets. In the winter's cold, my flute is my only
comfort ;-in the spring, I tread on a vast carpet of
scented moss. What lover would not take delight
in breathing forth his song, when the east wind has
betaken himself to his melancholy cave?"
The second sonnet was as follows:-
" The frost has left its moist traces on the flowers.
Who will prepare a canopy to shelter their light and
balmy texture? My song asks that the reign of
spring may be restored. My sad soul contemplates
the midnight moon as it hangs over the village.
In my melancholy, I ask from the clouds a com-
panion. In my solitude, I feel the want of some
spirit to sympathize with mine. In the spring I shall
betake me to the delicious landscapes of Lofeou.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
89
At the fall of leaves, I shall shut myself up devoted
to study."
Doctor Gou, and the other magistrates of the
party, spent much of the day in drinking and recrea-
tion. When the wine had made them somewhat
gay, they ordered the cloth away, and leaving the
table, went each in different directions, to vary their
amusements. Gou stopped to read the verses which
were attached to two pannels on the wall. Here
might be seen pieces taken from old poets of celebrity,
as well as the compositions of modern poets. Gou
ran through them all, and thought that he observed
in none of them any striking indication of genius
but in passing into a neighbouring gallery, he per-
ceived on a wall a piece of verse as lightly traced
as if it had been written by a flying dragon. He
approached, and read as follows :-
With his body at ease, and his mind tranquil,
moderate in his wishes, the poet filled this gallery
with the fruits of his fancy. The scent of the flowers
delighted and betrayed away my soul. No language
can impart the illusion which they have breathed
over me. Their whiteness awakens a thousand
vague thoughts. The faint light of the moon makes
me think of marriage. This moment methinks I
behold a troop of damsels before my eyes. My
mistress is the blossom of the peach-tree, and her
companions the branches of the willow.
"By Sse Yeoupe, of Nanking."
Gou read these verses over and over, and in a
transport of admiration exclaimed, "What beauti-
ful verses ! What purity and elegance ! They
are in the style of Poothsankiun, and the poet of
Jukhai."
90
JU-KIAO-LI :
He observed that the traces of ink were not yet
dry, which led him to say, "This must be some
modern author, and certainly he is a man of no
ordinary talent."
He impressed the name of Sse Yeoupe on his
memory ; and whilst he was yet undecided what
course to take, one of the community from a monas-
tery came to offer him tea. Gou, shewing him the
verses, asked him if he knew whose they were.
"There was a party of young men here just now,
drinking," answered the other; " and I have no
doubt they wrote them."
"And where are they gone?
"
When your party arrived to take some refresh-
ment, fearing that the young men should be trouble-
some to you, I requested them to go into the chapel
of Kouanyin, to continue their entertainment there."
Are they there still ?"
" I do not know."
" Then go and see; and if you find them, I re-
quest you will inform the gentleman of the name of
Sse, the author of these verses, that I should be glad
of a moment's conversation with him."
The priest went accordingly, but quickly returned,
and told Gou that the young man had just departed,
but that they might be sent after, as they could be
soon overtaken.
Gou was disappointed at this intelligence. "This
young man is possessed of distinguished talent,"
said he; "but I have not seen what is his appearance.
If I were to be very quick, I might come up with
him now ; but it would not be polite to send after
him and ask him to return."
The day began to close, and the magistrates sat
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
91
down to take advantage of the last moment that
remained for them. They soon, however, separated,
and returned to the city. Gou got into his sedan,
and directed the porters to draw back the curtains,
in order to enable him to enjoy the beauty of the
evening, and to lose none of the scent breathed from
the blossom of the trees which lined the road. He
had not proceeded above one or two miles*, when
he beheld, on the side of the way, in a bower formed
by plum-trees, a scarlet carpet spread with wine
vessels, and a party of young men, seated, enjoying
the sight of flowers, and playing music. Gou, sus-
pecting that Sse Yeoupe was amongst the party,
stopped his chair ; he got out, as if to admire the
flowers, and, without being perceived, observed the
company.
There were five or six young men in all, from
twenty to thirty years of age. He saw nothing
particularly pleasing in their appearance; they were
just such persons as one meets with every day.
There was, however, one amongst them distinguished
from the rest: his cap and clothes were simple, but
he was as beautiful as the jasper in a crown, and
brilliant as a ruby. He seemed to have been formed
of the air of the mountains and the rivers. His
mind, like a glittering ornament, was worthy of his
features. He had the elegant height of Weikiai,
the noble bearing of Pangang, and nothing of the
arrogant demeanour of a purse-proud upstart ;
everything about him bespoke a man of genuine
merit.
If that be Sse Yeoupe," said Gou, after having
92
JU-KIAO-LI:
looked at him for a short time, " he is a man dis-
tinguished by intellect as he is by appearance, and
therefore the best husband a father can give his
daughter." He called one of his servants, in whose
knowledge and address he confided. "Go," said
he to him, "and find out, without being perceived,
which of these gentlemen it is that bears the name of
Sse Yeoupe." The servant, in compliance with his
master's orders, gently approached the person who
carried the wine, and having ascertained the object
of his inquiry, informed his master that it was the
young man in the small cap and plain robe.
Gou was delighted. "This young man is unex-
ceptionable ; and if I can bring about his marriage
with Woukiao, I flatter myself that it will not be
badly performing my trust to Pe Thaihouan." He
called his servant again. "I shall return first,"
said he: 'do you remain where you are until this
gentleman is on the point of retiring; you will then
follow, and find out who he is, where he resides, if
his father and mother are still living with him, and
if he is married or single. You will take care and get
me the surest information on all these points."
The servant promised to be faithful; and Gou, enter-
ing his chair, continued his way, enjoying the per-
fume of the blossoms as he passed.
The next morning the servant came to give an
account of the result of his inquiries. "I yester-
day followed this gentleman," said he, "as soon as
he retired, and found that he lived in Black Clothes
Lane : I have had the minutest information about
him; he is a student of the city college, and has
lost his father and mother ; he has but little fortune,
and is yet unmarried ; his family is not inscribed
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
93
on the rolls of the city of Nanking, and he has
neither relation nor connexion here."
Gou's satisfaction was now complete. " Since
this young man," said he to himself, "is poor and
unmarried, the affair is accomplished at once. He
is without relations. I have full authority from Pe;
there can be no impediment to it. His exterior is
good he has a ready talent for poetry but still
we do not know in what stage of his studies he may
be at present. If he addicts himself only to com-
posing poetry and to drinking*, and if he neglects
his own advancement, he can do no good. It would
turn out then that he was only one of those enthu-
siasts who can find nothing better to do than spend
their time in the solitude of the mountains: he would
certainly not turn out to be the treasure which we
are seeking."
He then again called his servant. "You must,"
said he, "go once more to the college; find out if
Mr Sse is known there as a man possessed of talent,
and if he has obtained any distinguished rank at
the examinations."
The servant spent part of the day making those
inquiries, and on his return related all he had heard
to his master. "Mr Sse," said he, "entered the
college in his seventeenth year ; he was scarcely
settled there, when he lost his mother ; the three
years' mourning kept him back until last season,
when he attained his nineteenth year. His mourn-
ing being over, he presented himself this winter at
the annual examination, at which seigneur Li pre-
sides; it was his first examination; the list has not
94
JU-KIAO-LI
as yet appeared, so no one knows. what place he has
obtained; he is now twenty, and he is reputed to
be a young man of merit."
"That's well," replied Gou; "the lists of the
principal ought to have appeared by this."
" One of the proctors of the college told me
they would appear in four or five days," said the
servant.
Do you go then, and make fresh inquiries
when the lists appear, you will take care and let
me know what place he has obtained."
Ten days had elapsed, and Dr Gou lost sight
of this affair, when his servant, who had been
to the college, brought him the list : Gou opened
it, and saw that the name of Sse Yeoupe was the
first on the roll of the city college. This circum-
stance filled Gou's heart with joy. What a hap-
piness," said he what a blessing that there should
be amongst the young men of the day one of such
pre-eminent merit! This is the one that appears
destined by fate for this marriage." He imme-
diately sent for an old woman, named Tchang, who
was by profession a go-between # for making mar-
riages; when she came, he informed her of his in-
tentions. "I have," said he, "a daughter named
Woukiao, who has just attained her seventeenth
year. You must take on you the charge of bring-
ing about her marriage."
" Will you have the goodness to tell me who is
the great gentleman to whom I am to make your
lordship's proposals ?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
95
" He is no great gentleman," replied Gou;
" but a simple student of our city college : his
name is Sse; he lives in Black Clothes Lane :
he has recently gained the first place at the ex-
amination."
"I have heard," replied the old dame, "that a
few days ago the president Tchang had made pro-
positions of an alliance to you, and that you did
not accept them."
"I do not care much about riches or honours,"
said Dr Gou. "I wish to have for my son-in-law
a man of talent; this young Sse is gifted with all
the advantages of mind and figure, and that is my
reason for giving him a preference."
" Your lordship is perfectly right," replied the
old dame " I shall be there in a moment, and
settle the matter with a word ; but you must allow
me to go into your house and see the young
lady."
" Nothing is more fair," said Gou; and he de-
sired a young servant to conduct her into the inner
apartments. Gou's wife, who observed Woukiao
continually grieving about her father, had taken
her into the garden at the back of the house to try
and divert her thoughts. They were not of course
in the apartment to which the servant conducted
dame Tchang; he asked the waiting woman where
the ladies were.
"The ladies," replied she, " are gone into the
garden to enjoy the sight of the flowers."
The servant then led the go-between into the
pavilion in the garden: the lady Gou was there
with the young Woukiao, leaning from the window
96
JU-KIAOL1:
of the pavilion, contemplating the beautiful ame-
thyst colour of the blossoms with which the peach
trees were laden.
The go-between instantly made her obeisan
to the ladies.
" Who are you ?" demanded the lady Gou.
" I am," replied the old woman, " a person
whom your husband sent for, to treat about the
marriage of this young lady."
"It is Mr Gou that sent for you ?" said the lady.
" True, he told me yesterday that there was a Mr
Sse, a young man of merit and good appearance, who
would certainly be one day a very great man. If
you will negotiate this marriage for the young lady,
we shall feel much obliged to you."
"I will do all in my power to acquit myself to
your's and the doctor's satisfaction," replied the old
lady; and while speaking, she took care to look
attentively at the young lady, and admired the
great beauty with which nature had endowed
her. Struck with her extraordinary charms, she
exclaimed : " Can this really be the young
lady?"
It is the very one," replied the lady Gou.
The go-between began to laugh. "I want
neither to flatter nor exaggerate," said she; but
really, amongst the great number of young ladies
of distinction of this city that I have seen, I never
found one so truly beautiful. What has this Mr
Sse done to merit such an alliance?"
Many persons of quality, and magistrates, have
proposed for her," replied the lady Gou; " but
my husband would not consent. One day, walking
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
97
outside the city, he met this Mr Sse he says he is
an extraordinary young man, and wished to intro-
duce him into his family. This is what put this
marriage in his head, and you must lend us your
assistance."
When such a connexion and a lady so hand-
some are offered, how is it possible that any
young man can hesitate?" said the go-between.
In fact, I look upon it as a settled matter."
She rose to depart, after saying these words ; but
the lady Gou ordered one of her women to fetch a
little tea for Mrs Tchang. The latter accepted it ;
after which, she wished the two ladies a good day,
and descended from the pavilion. She wished to go
out at the front of the house, the same way as she
had entered ; but the servant told her that it would
be too long a way to go through the front door, and
that it was better to go out at the back."
" Very well," said the dame, "let us go the
shortest way."
The servant conducted her along a passage, and
let her out by the back door which opened on the
pleasure garden. This garden was situated quite
near the avenues of the city, a place little frequented,
and planted with large trees. Outside the city
were hills covered with verdure. The beauty of the
prospect, and the tranquillity of the place, had in-
duced Gou to build a pavilion there,where he was
in the habit of spending his leisure hours.
The old go-between, having gone out by the
back door, turned round her head, and saw the
two ladies still in the pavilion. Though far off, she
could perceive the regular features and charming
figure of the young lady, who appeared like a celes-
98
JU-KIAO-LI:
tial being ; she could not help praising her, even in
her own mind. " The lovely creature !"she exclaimed:
Can this bachelor be worthy of her ? She went
on by the great street, and immediately proceeded
to Black Clothes Lane. She soon found out the habi-
tation of Sse Yeoupe: chance would have it so, that
just at that moment he was conducting to the door
a person who had been visiting him. This person,
whose name was Liansian, was of the family of Sse
Tscutcheu of Meichan, who, when Kaotsoung went
into the south, came and settled on the left bank of
the great river, and founded a family in the city
of Nanking. At the age of thirteen years, Sse
Yeoupe lost his father, Sse Hao. Notwithstand-
ing this misfortune, the widow of Sse Hao, whose
name was Tchin, an enlightened and highly gifted
woman, took the greatest care of her son's educa-
tion ; it was her occupation from morning until
night. Sse Yeoupe, on whom nature had bestowed
so many outward advantages, possessing a fine
countenance, and a well-proportioned figure, was
not less distinguished by wit, understanding, and
penetration he entered the college at seventeen,
but in a short time had the misfortune to lose his
mother.
Thus Sse Yeoupe was left an orphan, isolated in
the world, without any support. It was true, Sse
Youan the inspector-general was his uncle; but
as he was only a temporary resident in the pro-
vince of Honan, they rarely had any account of
each other, and at the moment we now speak of,
each was ignorant of what had become of the other.
By. degrees Sse Yeoupe became accustomed to live
in honest poverty, happy and contented with his
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
99
humble lot, entirely given up to study and com-
position : he knew no want. At first he bore the
name of Liangthsai (which signifies clever,) but
his admiration for the genius of Lithaipe (a cele-
brated poet) induced him to change his sirname to
Yeoupe. Following this great man's example, he
composed in his leisure moments pieces of poetry
which obtained for him the approbation and praises
of all his fellow students. This same year, having
finished his term of mourning, he attended the an-
nual examination, which was opened by the prin-
cipal of the college; and he gained the first place
unexpectedly. Many came to congratulate him on
his success, and it was one of these visitors he was
at that moment conducting to the door.
He was just withdrawing when the go-between
came up, and seeing such a fine looking young
man, instantly thought it was Sse Yeoupe, and fol-
lowing him in, said-" Mr Sse, it's lucky that you
are at home; I am just in time."
Sse Yeoupe turned round his head, and seeing
the old woman, " Who are you ?" said he.
"I am a messenger of joy," replied the old
woman, laughing.
" Why, what other good news can you have to
tell me about my examination ?" asked Sse.
" Mr Sse," said she, " the brilliant success
which you had at the examination, is but a poor
subject of joy, and that has been already announced
to you ; but the news I have to tell you, is in truth
a blessing from heaven, really the happiest thing in
the world for you."
Sse Yeoupe began to laugh. If it is so," said
100
JU-KIAO-LI:
he, "come in, I pray you, and sit down, and tell
me all about it."
The old woman followed Sse Yeoupe into his
room, and sat down.
When she had taken some tea, Sse Yeoupe again
questioned her. " What other subject but his ex-
amination can a poor bachelor like me have to
rejoice in ?"
"Mr Sse, you are in the flower of your age, and
you are still single; if 1 offer you a rich and noble
young lady, of extraordinary beauty, for your wife,
will not that be a heavenly thing, and one of the
happiest in this world?"
Good woman," said Sse Yeoupe, smiling, if
I may rly on your words, it would indeed be a
subject of joy to me ; but is the thing really as you
represent?"
"All you have to do is to thank me; I will an-
swer for the truth of it."
" Well then, tell me to what family the young
lady belongs, and what gifts nature has bestowed
on her?"
"It is not one of those magistrates who formerly
held high offices that I have to call your attention
to but it is a great person, no other than seigneur
Gou, the member of the academy, who now holds
a place at court, but is here on leave; his riches
and rank are well known. Mr Sse, it would be
useless for me now to go into any details ; I have
only to tell you that his daughter, named Woukiao,
is now seventeen, and that she is 80 beautiful, that
if in heaven there are beings like her, on earth
there certainly never were such --no, not even in
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
101
painting is there anything to be compared to her.
The only thing I fear is, that when you behold her,
you will be like one bewitched."
If it is Dr Gou's daughter, and if she is such
a perfect beauty, why has he not given her to some
great personage, distinguished like himself with
the sash of honour? Why should he come to
seek a poor bachelor like me? There must be
something at the bottom of all this. I fear this
young lady is not the wonderful beauty you say."
" Mr Sse, there is one thing with which you are
not perhaps acquainted : the seigneur Gou has
received from heaven a most singular character.
All the magistrates and great people of the city
have proposed for her; he refused them all. There
have been several young men, either sons or
nephews to the first men in the country, who
have been repulsed in this manner. A few
days ago, he saw, I know not where, some verses
of your composition, which he said shewed great
talent; he has been so much delighted with them,
that he wished to send for you, to make you his
son-in-law. This is a happy effect of your des-
tiny it was fated for you from your birth ; it
forms part of that happiness promised you in your
pre-existent state
Why do you doubt the young
lady's beauty? Your suspicions are really ridicu-
lous. In point of rank, there are amongst the ma-
gistrates and great people of the city many equal
to Dr Gou; but as for beauty, there cannot be
found either in this city, or in the whole empire, a
young lady so accomplished in every respect as his
102
JU-KIAO-LI:
daughter. Do not, sir, suppose me capable of de-
ceiving you; but if you think that you are misin-
formed on the subject, you have only to make the
necessary inquiries yourself."
Sse Yeoupe began to laugh. " My good mother,"
said he, "I understand you very well, yet I cannot
place entire confidence in all you have said. But
cannot I judge for myself? I shall then be perfectly
satisfied."
"This is more of your fun, Mr Sse ! How can
you think that a young lady, the daughter of a ma-
gistrate of distinction, would let herself be seen by
a man?"
"Well then, my good mother, if that is not
possible, you may go back to her again," replied
Sse Yeoupe.
"Half my life have I followed the business of a
go-between, and never did I meet with anything
so strange. Seigneur Gou has a daughter pos-
sessed of exquisite beauty, for whom he has re-
fused the richest and most distinguished alliances
he makes the first advances, gives the preference to
you and you are the person who, when such an
unexpected blessing falls from the heavens on you,
make difficulties about accepting it. Now tell me
candidly yourself, do not you think it is exceed-
ingly ridiculous ?"
really am not disposed to make any difficulty
about it ; but marriage is a great and important
affair, on which subject people too often let them-
selves be easily deceived this is the reason I do
not hastily give credence to what people tell me.
If, my good mother, you have really any regard for
me, do not be so harsh-let me only conviuce myself
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
103
by one glance, that all you have been saying is
really true ; I shall not then confine myself to use-
less thanks ; I shall owe to you an obligation which,
while I exist, shall not be forgotten."
The old woman reflected for a moment. " Well,
Mr Sse," said she at last, "you are suspicious to
an excess; if I cannot procure for you an oppor-
tunity of seeing her, you will tell me that I wanted
tc impose on you. Well, be it so I will do all in
my power for you."
" If you will be so kind, I will be very grateful,"
said Sse Yeoupe."
"Behind Dr Gou's house," replied the old lady,
" there is a garden, which joins the avenue on the
eastern side of the city. In this garden stands a
pavilion, which rises above the surrounding walls,
commanding a delightful view of the city and its
environs: the pavilion can be easily seen from the
avenue. Now that the peach-trees are in full blos-
som, the lady Gou and her daughter take great
pleasure in looking at them from the top of the
pavilion. Since you absolutely make it a point to
see this young lady secretly, you can pretend to be
taking a walk under the pavilion in going or re-
turning, perhaps chance may favour you with a
sight of her; but take the greatest care not to
speak to any person whatsoever; if the seigneur
Gou was to hear of such a thing, it would be im-
possible for me to be of the least use to you in
future."
"Good mother," said Sse Yeoupe, "you render
me an essential service; do you think I would dare
to bring you into trouble by being guilty of such
indiscretion? But while the affair is in this train,
104
JU-KIAO-LI:
you must not go to seigneur Gou's; wait a day or
two, then come, and I will tell you what I have been
able to do."
"Let it be so," replied the old woman. "You
are very busy to-day; but when you have seen her,
and come begging to me, how do you know that I
may not be very busy in my turn? If that should
happen, you must not find fault."
"No, no," said Sse Yeoupe, laughing ; "I only
ask you one request, and I shall be indebted to you
for my future happiness."
"Well then, since you are determined how to act,
I will leave you, and return in two or three days to
know the news."
" Yes, yes," said Sse Yeoupe; "that will do."
The old woman rose and departed.
This conversation had inflamed Sse Yeoupe's
curiosity. The next morning, without telling any
one, not even taking his servant with him, he went
quite alone, and secretly, to walk behind Dr Gou's
garden. He instantly knew the pavilion, which ap-
peared above the walls the windows were shaded
from the heat of the sun by gauze curtains and red
blinds, half drawn down. He had come too early ;
everything was quiet, there was not a voice to be
heard : he stood some time in this place, but fearing
to remain too long, he again began to walk up and
down; having waited in vain some time further, he
returned to dine, and afterwards came back to re-
new his walk, his mind still filled with what had been
told him.
This time he was more fortunate, for as he was
passing the pavilion, he heard voices from within as
of persons laughing and chatting together. He feared
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
105
he might be observed looking that way, and in order
to conceal himself, he walked into a narrow lane,
shaded by the branches of elm-trees. Here he pre-
tended to be gathering some wild herbs that grew
near the walls of the city, but all the time had his
eyes fixed on the pavilion. A few minutes after, he
saw two waiting women draw up the curtains and
open the shutters; the sun was then near the meri-
dian, and a gentle breeze, blowing at intervals, bore
the most delightful perfumes to his senses. The noise
he had just heard only increased his emotion, and
when he rose up, he perceived two swallows de-
scending from the top of the pavilion, and perch
on the casement. They wandered here and there
with that pleasing animation which the genial in-
fluence of spring never fails to produce. At that
moment, one of the women who was at the window
was heard to call with a loud voice to her mistress,
"My lady, come quickly and look at these swallows,
how gracefully they fly about." She had scarcely
finished speaking, when a young lady, who seemed
to wish to hide herself, came near the window.
" Where are these swallows?" said she.
Here the swallows, perceiving persons approach-
ing, took flight, and hid themselves amongst the
willow leaves. The waiting-maid pointed them out
with her finger. "It is not here," said she; look,
there they are."
Her young mistress advanced hastily and looked
out of the window. As the swallows skimmed from
one side to another, it gave Sse Yeoupe an oppor-
tunity of minutely seeing her person. Her head-
dress was ornamented with pearls and the feathers
of the king-fisher; she was clothed in a robe of
106
JU-KIAO-LI:
white satin; her figure was regular and elegant;
and although she might be said to possess the
grace and attractions of a virgin, still there was
nothing remarkable about her, and neither her
features, her eyes, nor eyebrows, appeared capable
of expression. An assumed air of modesty was
observable on her countenance; her lips and cheeks
were covered with paint; in short, everything about
her was artificial.
Who would have supposed that two young ladies,
possessed of such different attractions, should live
in the same house one at the eastern, the other at
the western side ? Who would suppose that a dove
and a magpie should have dwelt in the same nest ?
Now this young lady was not Woukiao, but it was
Wouyan, Dr Gou's own daughter ; yet how was
Sse Yeoupe to know the mistake ? He had only
heard of one daughter. Before he saw her, his
heart was in a state of agitation; but the moment
he beheld her, he was utterly confounded.
"I was very right," said he to himself, 'to in-
sist on a sight of her. Had I given credit to the
reports of old mother Tchang, what would have
become of me on this occasion, where the happiness
of the remainder of my life was concerned ?"
He came gently out of the thicket where he had
been concealed ; and the young lady, hearing some
one under the trees, retired precipitately from the
window into the pavilion. Sse Yeoupe now become
quite indifferent, would not wait to see any more of
her, and returned by the same way that he had come.
Two days after this adventure, the old dame
Tchang came to inquire what had taken place
Well, seigneur Sse," said she, "have you yet seen
the person we were speaking of the other day ?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
107
Sse Yeoupe began to reflect. "Dr Gou," said
he, "is a great man in the literary world; he en-
joys a high reputation. If I say that I have seen
his daughter, and that, finding her ugly, I do not
wish the connexion, my conduct will appear im-
proper, and he may be offended. I must soften my
refusal, and conceal my motives." Then, addressing
himself to dame Tchang, "I have not been to the
place you mentioned the other day yet," said he
" how then could I have seen the person you speak
of?"
"And what reason had you for not going ?"
asked the old woman.
" It was because I have been thinking over the
affair :" said, Sse Yeoupe. "This member of the
academy is a great man, a person of eminent rank;
if I went to look at his daughter in secret, and if
I were surprised by any one, it would be very dis-
agreeable both to me and to him ; besides this, I
might be walking there from morning until night
before chance would favour me with a sight of her.
My good mother, you must take the trouble of con-
veying back my answer."
" You have or you have not seen her, sir; no
matter, I have told you nothing but the truth. Will
you again think on the subject?"
" But that even is not my only motive; there is
a learned man of the first order, as this doctor cer-
tainly is ; and here am I, a poor bachelor:--how is
it possible for us to be on an equality ?"
" It is not you that make suit to him, but it is he
that comes to you ; then how can there be any dif-
ficulty in the matter?"
"I feel highly honoured by the singular pre-
108
JU-KIAO-LI:
ference he wishes to grant me; but I am not dis-
posed to avail myself of it. I should be rather
humbled by it; and I tell you firmly, that I will
not accept this proposal."
The old woman tried several times to make
him alter this resolution, but her advice did not
produce any effect. She was obliged to take her
leave of Sse Yeoupe, to return and give an ac-
count of what had passed to Dr Gou.
On that day, Dr Gou not being at home, the go-
between went into the interior apartments, and
inquired for the mistress of the house. When
that lady perceived her, " Well!" said she,
"what news of the alliance which you have under-
took to bring about?"
" Well, well, we should never make sure of
anything beforehand in this world," answered the
old woman, shaking her head. "Not once in ten
instances would you meet with a failure like this.
Who ever would have thought that a poor bache-
lor should hesitate a moment about accepting such
a proposal ?"
" The doctor told me that this young man was a
very worthy and accomplished person. What can
be the cause of such obstinacy ?" demanded the
lady Gou.
"Do not take offence now, if I introduce the
name of another party," replied the go-between.
" That young man may have a great many merits.
and a good countenance; but take my word for it,
he is a man abandoned by heaven. I have an ex-
cellent match to propose to you in the person of
the son of governor Wang; he is nineteen years
of age, and for talent and exterior he yields in no-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
109
thing to this young bachelor Sse: besides this,
his fortune and family will just suit; so that if
you are rejected on the part of Sse, you will have
no cause to repent."
" Very well," replied the lady Gou; I will
speak to my husband when he returns."
The go-between then retired, and in a little time
after Dr Gou came home : his lady told him all
that the old woman had stated. This account
made the doctor sigh, and he remained some time
without speaking. "What," said he at last, can
be his motive for refusing me ? It must be
that old go-between, who did not know how to
explain herself; but another course is open to me
yet."
He immediately called a servant. " Take one of
my visiting cards," said he : "go to the college, and
invite young Mr Lieouiutching to come and see
me."
The servant soon performed the orders given
him. Upon his return, he announced that the gen-
tleman was on his way.
This young man was another student of the
college, also distinguished for talent. He had
been for some time a disciple of Dr Gou, when
he received the invitation, and of course gladly
complied with it. After the usual ceremonies had
been gone through, he thus addressed himself to
Dr Gou "Honoured master, you sent for your
pupil: what are your commands ?"
" No other than these," replied the doctor. "I
have a daughter named Woukiao she is now
seventeen years of age, she is possessed of some
beauty, and a great deal of talent. She is not.
110
JU-KIAO-LI :
only superior to the rest of her sex for the ele-
gance of her appearance, but she has an admirable
taste for poetry and literature: she is the object of
all my wife's tenderness and mine. Many gentle-
men of quality have asked for her; but I am of
opinion that real merit is seldom found amongst
the young men of rich and great families. A few
days ago, I met the young man who obtained the
first place at the last examination his name is
Sse Yeoupe. I was struck with his appearance, his
knowledge, and the great talent he has for poetry
and I thought I should be happy to give him my
daughter in marriage. I accordingly sent a go-
between to him, with a proposal to that effect; but
he refused it, I know not on what grounds. I ima-
gine it to be the old woman's fault, whose conver-
sation was not calculated to inspire him with suffi-
cient confidence. I wish then, my young friend, that
you would take the troubie of speaking to him,
and find out what are his intentions."
The seigneur Sse is in reality, both for his
figure and talents, the jasper which gives brilliancy
to our college. When the inspector- proclaimed
the result of the examination, every one broke
forth into eulogies on him. The preference which
you give him above those possessed of honours
and riches, is a mark of that general benevolence
in which you delight, and that purity, unsullied as
the snow, which distinguishes your character. I
feel much honoured by the choice you make of me
to conduct this negotiation; to-morrow I shall
comply with your commands. I am certain that
young Sse will be delighted with the opportunity of
having you to look up to, my respected master;
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
111
you will be unto him as the sacred mountain, or
the polar star : who would not be proud to have
the protection of such a man ?"
"If you will be so kind," said Dr Gou, my
efforts shall not be wanting to prove my gratitude.
But, my young friend," continued he, "at the last
examination you undoubtedly obtained some dis-
tinguished rank ?"
"I have no great ability," replied Lieouiutching.
I was only put on the second list."
" But you are possessed of eminent talents, my
young friend, and worthy of being placed on the
first list : how did it happen that you were not?
The first time I see his lordship, the inspector Li, I
will speak to him about it."
" The result of the examination," replied Lieou-
liutching," is, in the eyes of the examiner, a thing of
great importance and general interest. I have sub-
mitted to his decision; but if you would cast a fa-
vourable eye 'on your pupil, and procure for him
some advancement by your recommendation, it
would be a mark of particular kindness."
After this conversation, Lieouiutching arose and
took leave of Dr Gou.
If the gentle reader wishes to know how Lieou-
iutching acquitted himself of the commission in.
trusted to him, he has but to take the trouble of
perusing the following chapter.
112
JU-KIAO-LI:
CHAPTER V.
A POOR BACHELOR REFUSES TO MARRY A RICH
YOUNG LADY.
" A prying curiosity is sure to produce uneasiness. An able man will
be delighted with the emanations of genius. In the conduct of the
wisest men there is always something to be filled up. Their language,
be it ever so cautions, will give room for misconception."
SSE Yeoupe had gained considerably in character,
since his success at the examination. It was extra-
ordinary to meet, in one so young, such maturity
of talent, united with so prepossessing an appear-
ance; and every parent who had a daughter un-
married, secretly wished for him as a son-in-law.
But Sse Yeoupe's meditations were far from being
agreeable.
Of the five sorts of obligations which regulate
the life of man*," said he to himself, " the two first
no longer exist for me premature death has
snatched away both father and mother ; and I have
no brothers. With respect to two others, namely,
the duty which a subject owes his prince, and that
due from one friend towards another-why, I must
wait until an opportunity arrives, to enable me to
fulfil them. If I do not marry an accomplished and
beautiful woman, worthy to be my companion,
what will Sse Yeoupe be in this world ? Of what
use will be all the time I have devoted to study, and
to poetry-nay, even to have become a poet my-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
113
self? Haunted by vain fancies, a prey to feeling;
whither shall I betake myself? Death even offers
me no consolation "." Such were the thoughts
that occupied his mind : and when proposals of
marriage were offered to him, he made the necessary
inquiries, and not finding them very favourable to
the parties proposed, he did not hesitate a mo-
ment in refusing them. Dr Gou was the only one
who, on account of the charge left him by Pe,
dreaded missing this opportunity of obtaining for
that relation a son-in-law possessed of so much
merit. It was with this motive that he desired Mr
Lieouiutching to go and speak on the subject to Sse
Yeoupe.
Lieouiutching lost no time in obeying Dr Gou's
orders; he called on Sse Yeoupe, and, after some
preparatory conversation, explained the motive of
his visit.
" A few days ago, an old woman came to speak
to me on the same subject," replied Sse Yeoupe,
and I gave her my positive refusal. How is it
then that you, sir, should take the trouble of
coming about the same affair ? I would certainly
pay much deference to your prudent advice; but I
have already formed my resolution. I absolutely
cannot comply with your wish."
" The seigneur Gou is one of the most respect-
able inhabitants of the academic gardens," rejoined
Lieouiutching. As for wealth, he ranks first in
114
JU-KIAO-LI:
the city. He loves his daughter tenderly, he che-
rishes her as a pearl or precious stone. Several
young men, belonging to the first families in the
city, who have already attained the sash, have
proposed for her : her father has refused them all.
But struck with your merits and appearance, he
has a strong wish to succeed with you. It is in
fact a most advantageous match in every respect :
how can you still refuse it with so much perverse-
ness
Of all human affairs," said Sse Yeoupe, "the
first and most important is matrimony. For if
real talent and exterior qualities are not com-
bined, it is in reality but a state of slavery, to
which one is condemned for the remainder of his
life. Ought one then lightly to undertake such an
engagement ?"
Lieouiutching began to laugh. " My good bro-
ther," said he, " do not be offended at what I am
going to say to you. It is certain that you have
just been extremely successful at'the examination;
this however is but the triumph of an hour, and
is by no means a security that you will not remain
a very poor bachelor. How is it that the daughter
of a member of the academy is not, in your eyes, a
suitable match for you ? I speak not of her beauty,
nor shall I say that she resembles a flower, or is
like the jasper. Her rank, sir, and riches, if you
will but take possession of them, will prove a spe-
cies of seasoning to the matrimonial dish, which you
will relish more and more every day."
" It is quite unnecessary for you to talk to me
about her rank and wealth," impatiently interposed
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
115
Sse Yeoupe ; " I have already made some progress
in the garden of literature, and I flatter myself I
shall not long remain poor and unknown. And in
fact I do not know that I shall ever be fortunate
enough to meet with an accomplished woman, who
will be really worthy of being beloved."
" Well, this is still more laughable," said Lieou-
iutching; " but as you seem to be quite sure that
riches and rank await you, let me ask you, have
you ever seen a man possessed of opulence and dis-
tinction seek a lovely wife, and not find one ?"
6. Now, brother," replied Sse Yeoupe, smiling,
" do not give such weight to riches and rank, and
make so little of the beauty of woman. Formerly,
as well as at the present day, every man who dis-
tinguished himself by his talents, was able to ac-
quire fortune and high rank; but when did there
ever exist a great number of amiable and perfectly
beautiful women? If talent is unaccompanied by
beauty, I do not consider the woman who possesses
it accomplished ; if there be beauty without talent,
it is nothing like perfection for me; but if talents
even and beauty be found united in the same per-
son, and if her tastes, her sentiments, do not accord
as pulse to pulse with mine, the possessor of them
still is not the amiable woman that Sse Yeoupe
desires."
"You are mad, brother !" exclaimed Lieouiutch-
ing, bursting into a loud laugh. "If it be a beauty
of that kind you are looking for, away at once to
the singers and courtezans."
" In this instance I think with the prince of
literature," replied Sse Yeoupe, "that the union
which is formed by the sympathy of hearts, is such
116
JU-KIAO-LI:
as ensures felicity to two beings, even unto grey
hairs : and the close of life shall still find them oc-
cupied in watching over each other*. When I cite
the wholesome maxims of antiquity, why allude to
courtezans and singers ?"
"My brother, do not thus lose your time, re-
peating these useless maxims of antiquity, whilst
you neglect the real good that is before your eyes,"
said Lieouiutching.
" Make yourself easy, brother," answered Sse
Yeoupe. "I have already sworn, that if I do not
meet with an accomplished woman, such as I have
just been describing, I will never marry ; this is my
determination."
Lieouiutching again began to laugh. 'So I pre-
sume," said he, " if his majesty were to offer you
one of the princesses of his house, you would de-
cline the honour. This is truly the most prudent
course in the world. My brother, take care how
you adopt such a resolution ; take care how you
miss this opportunity, and abandon yourself to a
course which you may repent having taken, before
you get half way."
"I shall not repent, most assuredly," replied
Sse Yeoupe.
Lieouiutching was at last obliged to take leave.
He went to give an account of his proceedings to
Gou.
When the latter was informed that Sse Yeoupe
obstinately refused his proposal, he flew into a
rage, and vented his passion in invectives. " What !
does this insignificant animal give himself such
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
117
airs? Because he obtained the first place at the
examination, he thinks he can act in this unbe-
coming manner, contrary to all the laws of polite-
ness! Well, we shall see if this rank of bachelor,
on which he prides himself so much, is a thing
that will terminate so advantageously as he ima-
gines."
When he had finished speaking, he sat down
to write to the examiner, and, after having informed
him of what had happened, he begged him to
dismiss Sse Yeoupe from the eminent place which
had been given to him at the last examination.
This examiner, whose family name was Li, and sir-
name Meouhio, was of the same age as Gou, and
had been educated at the same college. He
wished to comply with the doctor's request but
when he reflected on the merits and qualifications
of Sse Yeoupe, against whom he had no com-
plaint to make, he did not wish thus to mortify
him. Yet, completely subservient to the wishes
of Dr Gou, he sent for the principal of the col-
lege, and secretly requested him to apprize Sse
Yeoupe of the intentions entertained with respect
to him, and if possible oblige him to yield to the
proposals of marriage which Dr Gou had made, as
it was by this course alone he would do away with
all obstacles to his future promotion.
The principal, having received these orders, im-
mediately sent to invite Sse Yeoupe to come
to his closet, and told him of all that had taken
place.
" I return my worthy masters many thanks for
the kindnesses they have shewn me," replied Sse
118
JU-KIAO-LI:
Yeoupe ; " your pupil ought certainly to execute
the orders which his master is pleased to give him ;
but I have some very particular reasons which I
cannot explain to Gou; all I dare ask of you is,
that when you see the examiner, you will tell him,
let the consequence be what it will, that I decline
the marriage. By taking this trouble you will do
me the greatest favour."
"You are wrong, my young friend," replied the
principal. "You are now twenty years of age;
this is the time to think of establishing yourself.
The seigneur Gou has shewn a great deal of kind-
ness in seeking this alliance with you, and in
making the first advances it is the most lucky
thing in the world for you. I do not speak of
Dr Gou's riches and rank; your distinguished
merits may perhaps make you view them with in-
difference ; but 1 have heard that his daughter is
gifted with every kind of attraction, and possesses
great talents. Even if you did violence to your in-
clinations by submitting to his wishes, I do not see
what great injury can result to you from it. What
can be your motive for refusing so decidedly?"
"I do not wish to impose on my much respected
master," said Sse Yeoupe; but I have already made
the strictest inquiries concerning his daughter,
and the result makes it absolutely impossible for me
to submit to Dr Gou's wishes."
If you thus refuse, my young friend, it would
be hard indeed to compel you; but seigneur Gou is
a contemporary and fellow student of my lord the
examiner, and consequently has much influence
over him. If the affair is not terminated to his
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
119
liking, I fear, my young friend, that something un-
favourable to your promotion will happen."
Sse Yeoupe began to smile. " What promo-
tion do you mean ? Is it this green collar ? It is
not surely for such a consideration that I would
engage in an affair so serious that its consequences
are to spread themselves over the rest of my life !
All I can do in the matter is, to submit to the ex-
aminer's decision;" and in saying these words,
he rose, took his leave, and left the apartment.
The principal, seeing the matter thus ended, went
and told the examiner what had occurred. The
latter was much chagrined, and said to himself,
'Since this young man is of so intractable a cha-
racter, I must take from him his present rank." New
reflections however presented themselves to his
mind : " Audyet another bachelor," said he, would
have eagerly grasped at such a brilliant offer, even
had it presented itself to him but in a dream : but
this Sse Yeoupe would meet death rather than ac-
cede to it. Notwithstanding this, he is a young
man of great promise, and it is with regret that I
am thus obliged to act towards him."
His meditations were now interrupted by the
sound of one of those hollow sticks with which
the watch man announces the arrival of the gazette ;
and one of the officers, entering the apartment, laid
a gazette before him. In looking over it, his at-
tention was caught by a passage in the list of
promotions and rewards granted to those magis-
trates who had rendered important services to the
state: from which it appeared that a master of the
120
JUKIAO-LI:
ceremonies, in consideration of the way in which
he had fulfilled his duties, was promoted to the
rank of member of the board of public works.
This was Pe, who, having been despatched beyond
the frontiers of the empire, on a mission to the camp
of the Tartars, and to compliment the captive em-
peror, had acquitted himself with honour of this
two-fold commission. When he returned to court,
his services were acknowledged ; and they accord-
ingly conferred on him the above-mentioned rank.
At the same time, the bad state of health in which
he was, obliged him to solicit leave of absence; and
they granted him permission to take the situation,
and then return to his own country to establish his
health, his services not being required at that time
in the capital.
In another paragraph he saw that Yang, who
was amongst those that were recommended in
consequence of length of service, was promoted to
the rank of minister of the second class. A third
paragraph concerning the imperial college stated
that those who superintended the literary assem-
blies holden there, at which the emperor attended,
had been promoted; and that Gou was amongst
the persons appointed as their successors. The
decree respecting these arrangements was already
executed by the emperor.
The moment examiner Li discovered that Gou
was called to court, and that his relation Pe was in
favour there, it struck him at once, that neither
the one nor the other would ever cast their eyes
again upon Sse Yeoupe ; he did not hesitate
therefore to despatch the following notice to the
college :-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
121
" Whereas I, Li, inspector of the college, and
examiner, have made inquiries respecting the pupil
Sse Yeoupe, and I have ascertained that he is a
person of intractable and obstinate character, over
confident, vain, proud and uncivil; and whereas it
is my duty to adopt severe measures with him ;
but, in consideration of his youth, I shall restrict
myself merely to the erasing of his name from the
list of candidates, and excluding him from the ex-
aminations. This is the course that seems expe-
dient for me to take."
As soon as this notice was made known to the
students, it excited great agitation amongst them,
and soon became the subject of general and anxious
conversation. One party ridiculed the folly of Sse
Yeoupe ; another eulogized his noble disinterested-
ness; whilst those of his immediate acquaintance
reprobated strongly his conduct.
"Why not accede to this proposal of marriage
said they ? " What can be your motive for refusing so
excellent a connexion ? There now-you have, in
consequence, lost your bachelor's place. Go at
once, and give in a written retractation to the ex-
aminer."
"So, then, it is the first place on the list of can-
didates that has cost me all this," cried Sse
Yeoupe. " Well, well-if the bachelor's cap is to
go, why, I don't know that my ears will look the
worse for it ! What harm then is done ? Gen-
tlemen, let me tell you, your advice is altogether
useless."
And the students, seeing that there was no
good to be got of Sse Yeoupe, left him to himself.
Thus
122
JU-KIAO-LI:
Three parts of obstinacy, and seven of imprudence,
Ferment together to form the character of a poet.
He disdains to explain himself to every day people;
A friend alone can pierce the veil of his silence.
We shall now leave Sse Yeoupe for awhile, to
return to Dr Gou. Though very angry at first
with the young student, Dr Gou determined, when
he heard how the former had been deprived of his
place, to reinstate him in a few days. But in the
meantime he had intelligence of Pe's promotion
and his return, as also of his own appointment
and summons to court. He eagerly ran to Wou-
kiao, to impart the news to her; and in the midst
of the general joy the affair of Sse Yeoupe alto-
gether escaped his memory. Gou wished at once
to repair to the capital, but he thought it better to
have an interview with Pe first, and restore to him
in person Woukiao, who had been entrusted to his
care.
He therefore resolved upon staying at home, and
sending, at the same time, a proper person to meet
Pe on his approach. The latter, now raised to the
dignity of a member of the board of public works,
started from the capital without delay. He pre-
served a strict incognito on the road, and in less
than a month arrived at Gou's residence at Nan-
king, where he was received with every demon-
stration of attachment.
After the first compliments were over, the two
friends entered the inner apartments, when a mes-
sage was sent to Woukiao to come and salute her
father. It is impossible to describe their mutual joy.
Gou had already provided a repast, and after
having proffered to Pe the traveller's draught, " to
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
123
wash down the dust* " he began to drink with
him. He then inquired into the details of his bro-
ther-in-law's mission into Tartary.
Pe, with a melancholy air, observed, "I could
do nothing to serve the captive emperor. When I
received my commission a long time ago, I expected
to have heard something about going to the royal
prisoner ; but my credentials contained only in-
structions to inquire about the prince's health, and
to present him with winter clothing there was not
a word about his return. The emperor was ex-
ceedingly mortified at this circumstance, and Yesian,
having pressed me with inquiries, placed me in a
very awkward situation. All that it was in my
power to say was, that the return of the captive
emperor was naturally the wish of our govern-
ment, but that as it was not known whether or
not the Tartar prince would agree to it, the subject
was not alluded to in my credentials ; and there-
fore that I was instructed merely to communicate
verbally upon it with the general. This reply was
by no means satisfactory to Yesian; and though he
agreed to treat of peace, he still observed, that he
was not warranted in treating verbally upon the
point alluded to : that as my credentials contained
no mention of the return of the captive emperor, he
could not take upon himself to permit that royal per-
son to depart; that if he acted upon a different foot-
ing he would be the laughing-stock of the middle
kingdom; and finally, that a fresh envoy must be sent
with full powers as to this point, but that, for him-
124
JU-KIAO-LI:
self, he should be always found in the same dispo-
sition. When I had stated the result of my mis-
sion at court, they appeared to be much discon-
certed; but it was impossible for them to avoid
sending Yangchen with powers to supply the defi-
cincy in my embassy."
" And do you believe that Yesian's real in-
tention was to permit the enlargement of the cap-
tive prince? inquired Gou.
" So far, at least, as I can see, it certainly was
his intention: and if Yangchen goes to Tartary,
the captive emperor is sure to return to court. But
I have my doubts that this restoration may not
place the reigning emperor in rather an awkward
predicament: and the apprehension of being my-
self involved unpleasantly in the affair, has
prompted me to apply for leave of absence, on the
ground of ill health. It is not out of any anxiety
about my own safety that 1 wished to retire, but I
really feel that things are now brought to such a
crisis, that it is not in the power of any single man
to apply the necessary remedy."
"My dear brother," said Gou, "you have en-
dured both wind and weather, and exposed your-
self to danger and fatigue; but the manner in
which you have executed your commission does
honour to your character, and stamps your re-
putation. I, unfortunately, am summoned to court.
I must walk into the net: how to get out of it, is
the question.
"Indeed, brother, you are almost a plant in the
academical garden : there you should remain and
grow. You have a resource, besides, in the general
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
125
examinations ; and sooner or later you will be en-
trusted with some mission."
"I hope so," said Gou; " but how are we to
treat old Yang?"
" That heartless, weak man " exclaimed Pe.
" I had scarcely arrived in the capital when he
came running to me with a set of apologies ; and
I remarked, that he grew warmer in his expres-
sions of zeal and attachment towards me, as soon
as the emperor's decree in my favour had made its
appearance. He persecuted me with his invita-
tions; and at last, when I was leaving the city, and
was to participate of the public farewell feast,
Yang was not satisfied until he prepared for me a
private feast of his own. When I saw how he
was determined to conduct himself, I could not help
joining him, as I used to do, in drinking and mirth;
but I was determined to mortify him by avoiding
every subject of a serious nature."
It was a good way enough," rejoined Gou,
laughing "but the proper way to mortify him
would be, to beat him well with a stick."
The two friends thus conversed together during
a part of the day. Pe remained to sleep at Gou's,
but determined to take his departure the next day.
"I have," said he, "pleaded illness, as a reason
for wishing to return home : I am afraid, if I waited
longer, that some tale-bearer or another would in-
form against me."
" You are very right to avoid that," said Gou;
" but surely there can be no danger in your re-
maining here two or three days. Remember that
when we part now, we know not when we shall see
each other again."
G 3
126
JU-KIAO-LI:
Well, well-I shall remain this day," said Pe;
"
but I must positively depart to-morrow."
" By the bye, brother," exclaimed Gou, laugh-
ing, " rather an odd occurrence took place a few
days ago, which I have not had time to relate to
you yet."
" What is it ?" eagerly inquired Pe.
" One day, I took it into my head to go to the
temple of the Valley of Immortals, for the purpose
of admiring the plum-trees in blossom. There I
fell in with a young bachelor of the name of Sse
Yeoupe, of tolerably good appearance, a very fair
poet, and possessing, in short, great merit and capa-
city. Upon inquiry, I found that the examiner Li had
given him the first place on the list of the ex-
aminations. I bethought me that this would be a
good match for my niece. I first of all sent a go-
between to him; next, a mutual friend: I have
sent to him two or three times and I cannot divine
his reasons, but he has distinctly refused to agree
to my proposal. Unable to overcome his reso-
lution, I wrote to examiner Li to interfere. He
spoke to the principal of the college, who had an
interview with Sse Yeoupe, during which he ex-
horted him to comply with the offer; would you
believe it, the obstinate fellow would listen to none
of them ? When the examiner saw that he was in-
tractable, he removed his name from its place on
the list ; and yet this young man shewed not the
least symptom of uneasiness. Did you ever know
anything so ridiculous ?"
Pe heard this statement with surprise. " This,"
said he, " is very singular; but whatever be the
capacity and personal recommendations of this
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
127
young man, his firmness only makes him more
respectable in my eyes. Men of genius have each
their own mode of viewing a matter, and they
ought not to be harsh with each other. You should
not let to-morrow pass, brother, without applying
to the examiner Li for the purpose of having this
young man restored to the rank of which he was
deprived."
Nothing is easier than to replace him on the
list," observed Gou.
In this way the brothers-in-law passed their time
for some hours. The third day being come, Pe
took his departure, with his daughter Houngiu, for
Kinchi. Gou made preparations to set out for the
capital.
Sse Yeoupe employed himself, ever since his at-
tempted disgrace, at home, in drinking, making
verses, and commemorating the beauties of willows
and flowers. He was not either desirous of fame
on the one hand, or dejected by poverty on the
other ; but when he contemplated some scene of
natural beauty, his mind was excited to a painful
sense of the loneliness of his situation ; and by de-
grees he relapsed into a fit of melancholy. He had
frequently been spoken to on the subject of mar-
riage; but he had now made up his mind, that an
object worthy of his love could not be found in the
city.
One day, in the height of spring, Sse Yeoupe pro-
posed to take a solitary walk; and just as he was
leaving his own door for the purpose, his attention
was drawn towards several persons, who were
dressed in blue, with immense caps, and mounted
128
JU-KIAO-L1:
on post-horses. As they advanced up the street,
one of them inquired of a passenger, in which house
Mr Sse lived.
There," said the person spoken to ; "and that
is Mr Sse himself."
The riders descended hastily, and going towards
Sse, they inquired if he was Mr Sse, the son of
lord Sse Hao.
" The same," replied the youth, somewhat sur-
prised; but, gentlemen, what is your business?"
" We are sent hither by his excellency, inspector-
general Sse, of the province of Honan."
It is of my uncle by the father's side, I pre-
sume, that you speak." said Sse.
" It is," said the messengers.
" Then, gentlemen, be so good as to walk in."
The men accordingly entered the apartment. Here
they were preparing to offer those marks of respect
to Sse, which befitted the rank of inferiors, when
they were stopped by Sse Yeoupe.
One moment, gentlemen, if you please," said
he.
" Are you my uncle's domestic servants, or are
you employed in the service of his department?"
" We are couriers of the government, charged by
him with despatches."
" Then, gentlemen, you are in effect employed
in the public service, and under such circum-
stances the ceremony of a formal salutation is not
required. You are bound to make only the usual
obeisance."
He then made the party sit down, and inquired
of them where his uncle then was.
They replied, "He has just returned from
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
129
visitation
to the province of Hou Kouang; he is
going to court to take the emperor's farther orders,
and is at this moment actually on board in the
river. He is anxious to bring you with him, and
has given us a letter for you to that effect."
They then handed the letter to Sse Yeoupe, which
he instantly opened, and read as follows:-
" A poor old uncle sends a thousand salutations
to his dear nephew, and addresses to him this letter.
"State affairs have given me constant employ-
ment, and now oblige me to keep journeying from
east to west, without stopping. They have occa-
sioned a separation between you and me, who are,
as it were, the same flesh and blood. This reflec-
tion is to me a source of grief.
" When I learned, some years ago, that my good
sister-in-law departed this life, 1 felt the utmost
affliction ; but it was very consolatory to learn, that
you had made as much progress in your studies as
could be expected at your time of life. I am now
sixty-three years of age, and I cannot but feel
that I am making a near approach to my grave. To
me it will be a night that knows no morn : for, alas,
I have no children. You that will one day be
celebrated in literature, you have lost both father
and mother; you are an orphan, and condemned to
lead a solitary life. Why do you not come and live
with me ? I shall be to you as a father, and you, I
doubt not, will behave towards me as a son; thus
shall we be to each other mutually a help and a
comfort. It is the fondest wish of my heart that
you should do so: I think I hear the voice of your
130
JU-KIAO-LI:
dear parents from their tomb, ratifying the union.
Tarry not, then, my nephew, but come away.
"The bearers of this will take care of your lug-
gage, and will accompany you. I expect you on
board my vessel without delay. More when we
meet."
A thousand reflections agitated the mind of Sse
Yeoupe in reading this letter. A little while ago
he had to lament the downfal of his family-the
degree of bachelor violently taken from him-all
hopes of marriage destroyed. These circumstances
were calculated to make his present residence suf-
ficiently unpalatable. How much better would it
have been, he thought, to join his uncle, and go to
court ; not that he valued the riches and the rank
which might be the consequences of such a step,
but that an opportunity might thereby, be afforded
him of discovering that long-sought object, a wo-
man, worthy of being beloved. This consideration
at once decided him. "Gentlemen," said he to
the persons before him, my uncle, your master,
has made a request of me; he wants to bring flesh
and blood together : I can't well refuse him : but
the mouth of the river is at a considerable distance,
and I am afraid that we shall not get there to-day.''
His lordship is in a hurry," said the men, "and
only waits for you, to weigh anchor. It is but
sixty miles from this; we have a horse for you;
and if you will set out at once, we can be there in
good time."
"Gentlemen, do you go on. I shall pack up my
ggage, and follow you." Sse Yeoupe took an
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
131
ounce of silver, and offered it to them, saying, "We
should set out without delay, and therefore I cannot
give you any refreshment; but this will answer as
well."
The messengers refused it, saying, " You are one
of our master's family, and we cannot think of tak-
ing anything from you."
" It is only a trifle, gentlemen," said Sse Yeoupe.
" Come, let us not lose time."
The men consented to accept the present, and
leaving an excellent horse at Sse Yeoupe's disposal,
they took their leave, and departed. The young
student then, calling an old servant whose name
was Sse Cheou, charged him to remain in the house
and take the greatest care of it. He then selected
some clothes and other necessary articles for a jour-
ney, and having arranged them in two parcels, he
sent a servant on with them to the mouth of the
river. He took with him, himself, only a young
servant named Siaohi; and having given some ne-
cessary directions, he mounted his horse to begin
his journey: but, as unlucky chance would have
it, the animal, finding out that his rider was by no
means an expert horseman, and that he was without
a whip, became very restive, and refused to move a
step. Sse Yeoupe pulled the reins unskilfully now
to the left, now to the right, and the only effect he
thus produced on 'the horse, was to provoke him
to rear and prance about, so as to put the rider into
very serious alarm for his own safety. " If he goes
on this way," thought Sse, "how are we to get to
the end of our journey, I wonder ?" His servant
Cheou now came up to him, and said, "Sir, if you
do not beat the horse, how do you think he will go?
132
JU-KIAO-LI:
You used to have a whip formerly, with a coral
handle : why not get that ? Nothing but fear will
ever make an animal move."
" You are right," said Sse Yeoupe ; and having
sent and obtained the whip, he laid about the ani-
mal in such a way, as to make him perfectly trac-
table. I see," said Sse Yeoupe, "that this ani-
mal will not move unless he is beaten. It is exactly
the same case with some men in this world, if they
are only one day freed from restraint."
It was now the middle of spring. The genial
mildness of the atmosphere, and the beautiful ap-
pearance of the blossoms, did not prevent Sse Yeoupe
from indulging in anxious reflections. " Well,"
said he, "I was not long about giving the go-by
to Gou's family, at all events; and had I fallen in
with their proposals, then farewell for ever to that
charming unknown object on whom my heart is set.
If I should discover thee, thou darling object of my
hopes, in the capital, my happiness is sealed for
ever; if not, I shall be always miserable. If my
search for thee, amidst the gay circles of the town,
be disappointed, then I shall leave my uncle, and
fly in quest of thee, by sea and land, to the utmost
verge of the horizon. Thee I must possess, be it at
whatever price; and then only shall I give up the pur-
suit, when success shall have crowned my labours."
Sse Yeoupe was too intently engaged with these
thoughts, to perceive that he had arrived at a spot
where several roads met, until an interruption of
rather an unpleasant nature brought him to his re-
collection. On a sudden, a man stood before the
traveller, and surveying him wildly, exclaimed,
" Yes, yes, 'tis he," and seizing the reins, bade the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
133
rider stop. Sse Yeoupe, as soon as the first emo-
tions of surprise were over, examined the person of
the stranger, and saw much in his appearance to
excite alarm. His hat was torn, and placed awry
upon his head ; his waistcoat reduced almost to
shreds; and the old pair of buskins which he wore
was covered with dirt. The perspiration rolled
down his face, as if it had been drenched in rain.
" Who are you ?" inquired Sse Youpe, somewhat
alarmed : " and why do you stop my horse ?"
The man could scarcely recover breath enough
to enable him to speak distinctly, and all that could
be heard from him was, "Well, I have just plumped
upon him !"
At these words Sse Yeoupe raised his whip, and
was about to strike when the man cried out, "Sir,
sir, do not strike me: if I do not get back my wife,
it will be your fault."
These words threw Sse Yeoupe into a great pas-
sion. " What madman is this!" said he; "what
have I to do with getting back your wife ? I never
saw or knew her. How have I injured you in the
least?"
"I don't mean that you took away my wife,"
answered the man; "but all I know is, that it is in
your power to restore her."
"Nonsense, nonsense, sir," said Sse Yeoupe:
" I am passing on the public road, about my own
business : why should you ask me to find your wife
for you, and say, that it is in my power to restore
her? I suspect, friend, that you are nothing better
than a highwayman. How dare you thus interrupt
me, in the open day, on the high road ? I am the
son of lord Sse, the inspector-general ; and I warn
134
JU-KIAO-LI:
you of the consequences of this conduct." With
this, Sse Yeoupe struck the man several blows
across the head and face. Siaohi (his servant) also
commenced belabouring the unfortunate intruder,
who continued still to vociferate an almost unin-
telligible jargon, the only words of which that
could be comprehended, were "Good sir, have
mercy on me, pity my affiction-indeed I am not
a villain." All the while, however, he retained the
bridle firmly in his grasp, as if he would sooner die
than let it go.
By this time several passengers and peasants
from the adjoining hamlet, attracted by the noise,
began to crowd to the spot, inquiring what was the
matter. Sse Yeoupe loudly and boldly demanded
an explanation of the man. "Was there ever any-
thing so strange in this world?" said he. " If you
have lost your wife, what have I, a casual passenger,
to do with getting her back for you?"
" I should be very sorry, sir, indeed," answered
the supposed maniac, "to stop you; but I have
only to request that you will give me your whip;
and my wife that moment will be restored to me."
The persons present set up a laugh. "What sort
of fool," said they, "must this fellow be, to talk of
his lost wife being brought back by virtue of a whip!"
"My whip," replied Sse Yeoupe, "has a coral
handle worth several ounces of gold; why should I
give it to you ?" And, yielding to an impulse of
anger, he raised the whip to strike at the man
again.
" Forbear, sir, one moment;" interposed the
latter: " before you strike, hear me explain one thing
to you."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
135
The by-standers interfered with Sse Yeoupe, and
begged of him to restrain his anger for an instant, in
order to hear the proffered explanation; "and if
he does not explain himself fully," said they, we
will let you beat him if you wish." They then re-
quired of the man to give full particulars as to who
he was, where he came from, and what was his
business. He answered, "I am from the village of
Yang-Kia, near the town of Tanyang, and my name
is Yang Ko. A few days ago I sent my wife to
town, to get some things out of pledge; as she was
going, some persons unknown carried her off. I
searched for her all day, and could get no tidings
of her; but this morning I went to Keouyang,
where I fell in with a doctor, skilled in the art of
magic prayers. I begged that he would offer one
on my behalf, and he has promised me that at three
quarters past three o'clock this day I should get
back my wife. I asked him in what direction I was
to go in order to find her : he desired me to proceed
to the north-east, and said that at a distance of
about forty miles * I should come to a cross road ;
that there I should meet a young lord in a coat
of yellow-willow colour, mounted on a speckled
horse; that I should stop him, and ask the whip
which he held in his hand; and that forthwith
I
should find my wife. I was to make all the haste
I could, because, if I was one moment behind, and
happened to miss him, then I was never to recover
my wife. I started off, and arrived here out of
breath, and without having broken my fast. I have
run the forty miles to get here, and I have to thank
136
JU-KIAO-LI:
my own exertions that I just came in time to catch
this young lord, whose dress and appearance an-
swer exactly to the description that had been given
to me. There can be no doubt that it is the very
person. Let me entreat of him then to do an act
of humanity, and give me his whip, that my wife
and I may be brought together again, since it is in
his power to work such a wonderful thing."
" My very good friend," said Sse Yeoupe, laugh-
ing, you altogether sadly bewilder yourself; there
never was in the world a doctor gifted with these
wonderful faculties. After having carefully ex-
amined my dress and countenance, as well as the
horse I rode upon, you have fabricated this tale just
to trick me out of my whip. How can you think of
imposing such nonsense upon any one?"
ob I should not think of imposing on you," re-
plied Yang Ko; "for I know that you are not to be
imposed upon; but perhaps you may not disbe-
lieve all the doctor has said, when I tell you that he
also mentioned to me, that the object of your jour-
ney was to look out for a marriage. Now, sir, is
that true or false ? You best know, young gentle-
man, what you are about."
Sse Yeoupe was fixed with astonishment at hear-
ing these words. "I thought," said he to himself,
"that this matter had been so completely buried in
my own breast, that the very gods themselves would
not be able to discover it. How is it that this man
could find it out ? There must be some truth in all
this." " Well, well," said he, after a pause, to
Yang Ko, "here is my whip for you; it is of no
great consequence; but I must use the utmost expe-
dition to get to the mouth of the river this day;
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
137
and if I have no whip, my horse will not go on.
What am I to do ?"
The spectators, who were very much struck with
what they had just observed, became exceedingly
curious to know in what manner the whip of one
party was to restore the wife of the other. Seeing
that Sse Yeoupe was inclined to comply with the
man's request, they suggested to Yang Ko to go
and pull a bough from one of the willow trees, to
serve as a whip for the young gentleman.
Yang Ko would very willingly have gone to do
what was required of him, but he dreaded that Sse
Yeoupe would take advantage of the opportunity,
and escape. The latter, seeing the cause of Yang
Ko's hesitation, at once threw him the whip.
" There," said he, "I have promised it to you, and
I shall not break my word. Now, go and cut me
off a branch of willow; for I am very anxious to
pursue my journey."
Yang Ko received the gift with a thousand pro-
testations of gratitude. "How many thanks do I
owe you, sir !" said he. "You may depend upon it,
that if I find my wife, I shall not fail to let you have
your whip back." He then looked about for a tree,
from which to cut a small branch for Sse Yeoupe.
It was now the second decade of the second
moon The willow-trees that stood on the road
side had yet sent forth only small weak shoots,
such as would be of very little use as a substitute
for a whip. But at a little distance from the road
on the south-eastern side, at the opening of a shady
walk, and close to the ruins of a chapel, three or
138
JUKIAO-LI:
four larger willow-trees were seen, with their tops
rising above the old walls. Yang Ko repaired to
this spot; but scarcely had he clambered up one of
the trees, and was about to pull away a bough, when
he heard the cries of some person in distress issue
from the interior of the ruins. He put aside the
intervening branches, and gaining a view of the
chapel, he saw distinctly three men surrounding a
female, and forcibly keeping her between them.
She appeared to be resisting their violence, and
this was the cause of the cries which had been
heard.
No sooner had Yang Ko beheld this spectacle,
than he exclaimed, "Robbers, villains, it is here
then you come to hide yourselves, after having
carried off another man's wife!' He then jumped
from the tree, and ran to the door of the chapel, at
which he knocked several times. The crowd on the
road, hearing the words it is here, then," ran a
to the spot, to see what was the matter. Yang Ko,
by this time, finding that the principal door, at
which he had knocked, was strongly barricadoed,
and not wishing to wait to break it open, went
round the building to look for another entrance.
But before he could get to the back of the chapel,
the three villains had succeeded in effecting their
escape through a breach in the wall, leaving the
female behind. The husband and wife were so
transported with joy at being thus restored to each
other, that they melted into tears. The spectators
were petrified at the sight, for they now were con-
vinced that all Yang Ko had told them was per-
fectly true.
When Sse Yeoupe heard that Yang Ko had found
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
139
his wife, he was struck with inexpressible surprise.
Leaving his horse in care of Siaohi, he went to the
chapel, in order to witness the fact with his own
eyes. When Yang Ko saw him, he said to his wife,
" If I-had not come here to cut a willow bough for
this gentleman, that he might give me his whip,
you and I never would have seen each other again
in this life." He then gave back the whip to Sse
Yeoupe. "I thank you for it, a thousand times,"
said he: "I have now no further use for it."
"Did ever any body in this universe see such a
strange affair as this !" exclaimed Sse Yeoupe. "I
have done you some wrong, my friend," addres-
sing himself to Yang Ko; "but let me know, I beg
of you, the name of this doctor, who says the magic
prayers."
" No one knows his name, sir," answered Yang
Ko; "but he carries a paper in his hand, with
the words Sai-Chin-Sian' written upon it: he is
usually called 'Sai-Chin-Sian,' or the Hermit of
Gratitude * "
Yang Ko renewed his expressions of thanks to
Sse Yeoupe and to the spectators; and after taking
leave of the party, proceeded with his wife on their
return home. Sse Yeoupe left the chapel, and re-
mounting his horse, resumed his journey, his mind
being filled with contending emotions arising from
the recent extraordinary events which he had wit-
nessed.
' Doubtless," said he to himself, " the old pro-
verb applies exactly to my case. 'A life of good
140
JU-KIAO-LI:
sense, and an hour of blundering.' The journey I
am upon, in compliance with the will of my uncle,
has at bottom, certainly, the object of seeking an
accomplished woman. This hermit who could
find out that I left my home in pursuit of mar-
riage, can as easily tell me, I dare say, where
that marriage may occur. Now if, without any
clue to guide me, I go about from place to place,
seeking the object of my wishes, it will be only
like attempting to pursue that which has neither
shadow nor trace; besides, I run the chance of
having nothing for all my pains. I see it is yet
early in the day ; I think I had better take the
direction of Keouyoung at once; Ishall see this her-
mit, beseech him to throw some light upon this
affair of my marriage, and even still I shall be
in time to repair to the place where my uncle ex-
pects me."
This resolution being formed, Sse Yeoupe directed
his horse to the south-west, taking the same road
by which Yang Ko and his wife had a little before
proceeded homeward; a course, on the part of this
young gentleman, that subsequently gave birth, as
will be seen, to a number of events. We shall
see, by-and-by, how a damsel, placed in the midst
of a thousand perplexities, becomes the object of
the tenderest regard, and of the unwearied pursuit
of a poet.
Now to understand truly whether Sse Yeoupe
found the hermit or not, and consulted him re-
specting his marriage, it is necessary only to peruse
the following chapter.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
141
CHAPTER VI.
A
WORTHLESS LOVER TAKES TO HIMSELF THE
MERIT OF VERSES WHICH HE DID NOT COM-
POSE.
" Let a man patch up his character, let him give a colour to his
conduct : but in literature, at least, there should be no petty thefts. A
poetical expression, as a stream, will run through a course of ages :
ten years of uneasiness may be the consequence of only a few lines:
fine verses are as precious as the relics of a saint."
WE have just seen how Sse Yeoupe, in deter-
mining to go to consult the hermit, also fully
intended to keep the appointment which he had
set out for the purpose of fulfilling with his uncle,
the inspector-general. He briskly pushed on in the
direction of Keouyoung, but had not proceeded
more than fourteen or fifteen miles *, when the sun
began to descend towards the west. After the tra-
veller had accomplished four or five miles more on
his journey, the shadows of night began to fall; he
threw his eyes around anxiously, and not being able
to distinguish a habitation of any sort, he felt consi-
derable alarm. But his servant Siaohi, whose
power of vision was far more acute, said to him,
"Do not be uneasy, sir: do you observe those trees
that stand at the side of the path yonder to-
wards the west? There must certainly be a village
there."
" How do you know?" inquired his master.
" Is not that the clock of a convent," asked :
142
JU-KIAO-LI:
Siaohi, which appears through that clump of
trees If that be a clock, there must also be a
temple; and near that temple there must certainly
be some houses."
" You are right, it is a clock," said Sse Yeoupe,
looking to that side ; "but I see no houses. We
must only ask a night's lodging at the con-
vent."
He turned his horse's head towards the shaded
walk; and when they arrived at the clump of trees,
a village presented itself to their view, consisting
of about two or three hundred houses scattered up
and down, four or five together, at certain distances
from each other.
Night had now come on ; the doors of all the
houses were closed, and it would have been useless
to knock at any of them. Luckily, it was the night
of the thirteenth of the moon; and that planet
shone out in all its effulgence in the midst of an
unclouded sky. The travellers had now only to
take the direction where the clock stood, in order
to find the door of the convent. Just as they
passed a sheet of water, they heard it striking,
when Sse Yeoupe exclaimed-" Well ! we shall
not be under the disagreeable necessity of passing
this night, at all events, without shelter."
A few further paces brought them to the convent
door. Here Sse Yeoupe giving his horse to the ser-
vant, went into the temple. The edifice was not on
a large scale; but it was elegant and well propor-
tioned. Its site was the foot of a mountain, and on
two sides it was protected by a row of cypress-trees.
Sse Yeoupe did not dwell upon the beauties of the
structure very long, but proceeded at once to the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
143
inhabited part of the place, where he found two or
three of the religious reciting their evening office.
One of them stepped forward hastily, and inquired
the stranger's business.
"I am a student," said Sse Yeoupe, " from
town, on my way to the chapel of Keouyoung. I
have been benighted on the road, and am obliged to
stop; I should like to pass the night in your monas-
tery, and I trust you will grant me the permission
to do so."
" Nothing is more easy," answered the reli-
gious ;" and he ordered one of his people to go and
conduct Siaohi, with the horse, behind the convent,
while another bore a lantern, and led Sse Yeoupe
into the interior of the temple.
After the usual compliments, Sse Yeoupe and
the religious sat down. " May I ask you, sir,"
said the latter, " to inform me of your name, and
the name of your family ?"
" The name of my family," answered Sse Yeoupe,
"
is Sse."
"And what, in the name of wonder, brings master
Sse to Keouyoung?"
" My uncle," replied Sse Yeoupe, "is going to
court to get some orders, and is now on board a
vessel at the mouth of the river; he has sent for
me to bear him company. When I got half way, I
accidentally heard that there was a person called
the Hermit of Gratitude' at Keouyoung, who has
an extraordinary talent in magic prayers. I took it
into my head to go and ask him to say one on my
behalf: and that is the business that has brought
me this way."
"What office has your uncle ?" inquired the host.
144
JU-KIAO-LI:
My uncle," said Sse Yeoupe, " has just finished
a tour of inspection in the province of Houkou-
ang, and he is now going to court to take fresh
orders."
" What, then, I have been speaking to a person
of your rank all this while, and have not paid him
the respect due to his station!"
And saying this, he ordered supper to be
brought.
"
Allow me now to ask your name, sir," said
Sse.
" My name is Tsingin *," replied the religious.
" And this handsome monastery is, doubtless,
the village chapel?" asked Sse Yeoupe. "Is it an
ancient or a modern construction ?"
"It is called the temple of Kouanyin t," replied
the holy man; " and it is neither an old edifice, nor
the chapel of the village. It is a house of prayer,
erected some eighteen years ago, by a magistrate
of Kinchi, of the name of Pe."
"And what could be his motive for raising such
an edifice in this place ?" inquired Sse Yeoupe.
The fact was, that Pe had no male issue,"
answered Tsingin; "and as both himself and his
wife were very religious and devout to Buddha 1,
he built this temple, and dedicated it to Kouanyin
of the white garment, in the hope of having a son.
He has purchased, in addition, tracts of lands,
and laid out here a couple of thousand ounces of
gold."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
145
"And did he succeed in obtaining a son?"
asked Sse Yeoupe.
" No, he had no son; but he built this temple
one year, and the following one he had a daughter."
" A daughter, indeed!" cried Sse Yeoupe, ready
to die with laughter. "Why, if he had ten daughters
born to him, instead of one, they would not be worth
one boy."
" You must not talk in that way, young master,"
said Tsingin. Ten boys are nothing compared to
such a daughter as Pe's."
How is that? ?" said Sse Yeoupe.
" This damsel," answered the religious, "pos-
sesses a degree of beauty that is capable of charm-
ing the fishes out of the sea, and drawing down the
very cranes from the heavens her face outshines
the brightness of the moon, and brings to shame
the tints of the flowers ! This is not her only merit:
she excels at her pencil and her needle; she is well
read in ancient and modern history; and she is
very generally and thoroughly informed. She
writes verses, songs, odes, in a superior style to all
the ancient poets; and Pe submits to her judgment
most of his compositions. Find me out, if you can,
any young gentleman worthy to be compared with
her."
Sse Yeoupe was quite enchanted with this de-
scription, and his whole frame became agitated with
the emotions which it produced in his mind. "Pray,
tell me," said he, eagerly, " is this young lady
married?"
And pray, whom do you want her to marry i",
rejoined Tsingin.
In these cantons, surely, there are no wanting
146
JU-KIAO-LI:
young men of wealth and family: her father could
easily find a person of equal rank with himself-
why has she not been married ?"
" If rank and wealth were the only considerations
to be attended to, the case might be easily settled,"
replied Tsingin; "but these are points to which
lord Pe is perfectly indifferent : he looks more to
merit, to accomplishments, and distinguished ca-
pacity."
Well !" said Sse Yeoupe, "these are still more
easily found."
" Not so easily, young sir," rejoined the holy
man. When a suitor presents himself with an
offer of marriage to this young lady, he must, first
of all, compose a piece, either in poetry or prose,
which he must submit to the opinion of Pe and his
daughter. She will not be allied to anybody but
the person who shall succeed in obtaining their ap-.
probation in this way. Now the young critic, you
must know, is extremely fastidious; none of the
pieces that have been hitherto submitted to her
judgment, found favour in her sight; she has at-
tained now her seventeenth year, and has not yet
had the opportunity of entering into a desirable en-
gagement."
If that be so-but-" said Sse Yeoupe, checking
himself suddenly ; "yes, the destiny of my mar-
riage is to be fulfilled here. I see it."
Supper being now brought, the companions sat
down to the table. When they finished the repast,
Tsingin proposed to Sse Yeoupe, that as he must
be fatigued after his ride, it would be proper for him
to retire soon to rest. He then took a lantern and
conducted the student into an elegantly-furnished
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
147
apartment, which was destined for the use of visi-
tors. He ordered a fire-pan to be brought, in which
some perfumes were thrown, and then he desired a
kettle of excellent bitter tea, which had been left on
the table, to be placed over the fire. After taking
leave of Sse Yeoupe for the night, the host retired.
The young man's thoughts were entirely engrossed
by what he had just been listening to and he burned
with curiosity to behold this beautiful young lady.
His fancy was so engaged with the subject that, in-
stead of going to sleep, he tossed himself about in
bed; and finding that he could not close an eye, he
determined fairly to get up and dress himself. He
went towards the window and looked out. The moon
was now shining in mid-heaven, with an effulgence
equal almost to that of day. Sse Yeoupe called up
Siaohi, and directed him to follow to the door of the
monastery. The brilliancy of the moon, and the
state of abstraction in which he had been involved,
prevented the wanderer from perceiving that he had
now passed through a grove of cypress-trees, and
that he was the distance of an arrow-shot from the
convent; but he was suddenly recalled to himself
by the sound of voices. He looked around, and
distinguished, just near the spot where he stood, a
country-house, situated in the midst of a plantation
of peach and plum-trees. He proceeded forward,
and went up to a pavilion where he saw two men
occupied in drinking and composing verses. He
stood on tip-toe to reach the window of the pavilion,
in order to catch their conversation. One of the
party, who had on a white dress, said to the other,
" I am afraid, Tchang, that you are at a loss for a
rhyme to the word 'branch.'''
148
JU-KIAO-LI:
The other, who had on a green robe, replied.
" It is by no means the word ' branch' that gives me
any trouble; I find the word ' thought the most
difficult to procure a rhyme for. And yet, who be-
sides myself understands the matter sufficiently ?"
" Doubtless, you are not to be equalled," said
the person in the white dress "and for a poet, I
know not the man that should be preferred to you.
As soon as these two pieces of poetry are finished,
consider your marriage as an event that cannot fail
to take place."
The other young man hung his head, and after
a pause, during which he muttered a few words, he
burst out into these expressions: "There! there !
excellent ! admirable !" He then seized a pen, and
committing his invaluable thoughts to paper, sub-
mitted them to his companion. The latter, clapping
his hands, and shouting in a transport of admira-
tion, exclaimed, "This is most excellent It is
quite in the style of old Touchi Not only are
your rhymes perfectly accurate, but there is an ad-
mirable force and elevation in the composition; you
possess quite a superior degree of talent, sir; and I
assure you that I can appreciate the extent of it."
" I have finished my composition," said the young
man in green. "Now if the young lady should
happen to fall to my lot, can you give her up with-
out a sigh
My composition the other day, I own, encouraged
me a little; but I am obliged to say, that by
your verses this night you have thrown me into
despair; I actually have a distaste for the em-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
149
ployment now. Let us take a few cups to inspire
us ; I shall then endeavour to write something, and
boldly enter the lists with you."
" You must first hear me read my composition,
and tell me how you like it," said the young gen-
tleman in green.
66 All fair," replied the other;" and the former
proceeded to read as follows:-
The willow feels the breath of gentle spring,
And branches now in quick succession rise.
They seem like grassy wreaths together set,
Or filaments of gold arranged on high.
The youth in white did not allow his friend time
to finish the whole composition, but interrupted
him with an exclamation " Admirable ! excellent
Let me pour you out another cup, and then you can
go on to the end."
The young poet, quite overjoyed, took the cup,
and proceeded to read out these lines
How blest the angler when he kills his prey !
How sad his lot who guides a restive horse !
In one short day 'the parch'd-up tree will die,
And all its boughs be pulled for vilest use.
He had scarcely concluded the last line when his
companion broke out into an ecstasy of admiration
and praise. Sse Yeoupe, who was concealed in a
corner of the window, listening to what had passed,
could no longer contain himself, but burst into a
loud fit of laughter. The two friends jumped up in
alarm, and, going to the window, discovered Sse
Yeoupe. " Who are you?" said they. "And where-
fore have you come thus to secrete yourself here,
and make sport of us?"
150
JU-KIAO-LI:
" Mere accident : as I was taking a moonlight
walk," said Sse Yeoupe, happening to hear
some person declaim a piece of beautiful poetry,
my very hands and feet were agitated with plea-
sure; and by an irresistible impulse I uttered an
expression of admiration, by which you were inter-
rupted. I have a great many apologies to make to
you for my want of politeness."
The two young men saw at once, in the person of
the intruder, a gentleman of address.
" Since you are conversant with poetry," said the
youth in white, "and have a taste for the art, we
are friends."
The poet himself added, "As you appear to
be a person of merit, come and sit down with us;"
and taking Sse Yeoupe's arm, he led him into the
pavilion.
"I am sorry, gentlemen," said the latter, to
give you all this trouble."
" Why so ?" asked the youth in green. " Are not
all those who live within the four seas, brethren?"
Sse Yeoupe was then requested to sit down, and
some wine was ordered to be brought. The stranger
was then requested to state his name and sir-
name.
"I am of the family of Sse," replied Sse Yeoupe :
" my sirname is Liansian. Will you now permit
me, gentlemen, to ask your names?"
The young man in white answered : "My name
is Wang, and my sirname is composed of the words
Wen (literature) and of Hiang (to look). This gen-
tleman with me is called Fanjou, and his family
name is Tchang. He is the richest gentleman, and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
151
the best poet, in our town. He has his flower-
garden in this place. It is also his retreat for
study."
"I now see that I have been a very great in-
truder," observed Sse Yeoupe : "but the compo-
sition which I have just heard read is intended,
if I mistake not, to celebrate the spring willows."
"You must have an exquisitely quick ear, in-
deed," said Tchangfanjou, "to have been able to
distinguish so well through this casement. It cer-
tainly is on the subject of spring willows, and a
very difficult one it is, I promise you."
" How difficult?" exclaimed the visitor.
Because," answered the other, "the rhymes
are prescribed to me. I have bestowed a great deal
of pains on them, for I am determined that this
shall be a finished piece."
" Whose is the original ?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
" You may be sure," said Tchangfanjou, "if
she had not been a very distinguished authoress,
I would not have taken so much trouble about
them."
Come, gentlemen," said Sse Yeoupe, " as we
are to be friends, let me hear the whole secret."
"Why it is rather an odd sort of matter, alto-
gether," replied Wangwenhiang, "and cannot be so
easily told. However, since you are curious to
hear it, take off three large cups first, and you
shall have the whole story."
"Right, right!" exclaimed the poet; and he or-
dered the servants to fetch some wine.
My head is rather a weak one," said Sse
Yeoupe: " and I cannot bear much wine."
Well, but you must make a little sacrifice, if
152
JU-KIAO-LI:
you intend that we should indulge your curiosity,"
replied Wangwenhiang.
Sse Yeoupe took the cups, when Tchangfanjou
said to him, "You are a very worthy fellow, seig-
neur Sse ; let me tell you that much. Now you
are to know, that the original piece, containing the
particular rhymes which we are to adopt, has been
composed by a young lady, the daughter of a man
of rank living in the neighbouring town. Her en-
dowments outshine those even of Sichi and of
Maotsiang ; and her personal charms are un-
rivalled. She has made a vow against marrying a
man of the ordinary sort: she is resolved upon
having no one but a poet of distinguished talents
a person who can vie with herself in literature,
both prose and poetry. She will wait until she
meets with a suitor of this description. A few days
ago, as she was going to burn some perfumes in
the temple, she saw some willows which had then
just put on their foliage : she was quite captivated
with their beautiful appearance, and she composed
some stanzas upon them. She then offered up a
prayer to Bouddha, that she might he married to
the person who could write another piece to the
same rhymes. Here is the plain reason why this
gentleman and myself are toiling to death in this
place. Now if I can only succeed in completing
a piece conformably to the conditions that have
been thus laid down, I shall look upon my marriage
as a very probable event; and I am sure, sir,
you will allow that that would be no small ad-
vantage."
Sse Yeoupe was not at a loss to discover, from
this communication, that the lady in question was
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
153
no other than the daughter of the minister Pe.
However, he thought it better to say nothing of
her at present and he merely requested that the
original composition might be shewn to him.
" If you want to see that, you must first take three
more cups," observed Tchangfanjou.
" I shall drink after I have seen the verses," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe.
" Very well then, but you will be as good as
your word," said Tchangfanjou; and going to a
chest, he brought out a paper which he handed to
Sse Yeoupe. The latter unfolded it, and saw that
it was a manuscript composition on "The Willows
of Spring," which was in these terms:-
Light green, and golden yellow, are the colours of the
second moon;
The branches of the willow impend over the surface of
the lake,
And like silk films gently wave in the breeze :
The moon's light will soon come to brighten their soft
texture.
Thus a maiden, 'ere the time of marriage arrives,
Lets her uncertain thoughts wander over the subject.
The prince of the east has called forth this vernal
foliage ;
Which, brilliant as the silken tissue, charms the fancy.
Sse Yeoupe was enraptured with these verses,
and in a transport of admiration exclaimed : Is
it possible that there can be in the world a girl of
such wonderful talent Should not such a piece as
this make every poet we have of the other sex
blush for his inferiority ?"
He read the manuscript over and over again,
and appeared as if he would never take his eyes off
the
paper. Young gentleman," said Tchang-
154
JU-KIAO-LI:
fanjou, methinks you have had time enough to
read these verses : do you remember that you have
to take three cups yet? You are not going to de-
cline fulfilling your contract with us, I hope."
"I should not object to drink three hundred, for
such a composition as this !" said Sse Yeoupe ;
'but what can you make of such a miserable drinker
as I am?"
"I perceive," said Wangwenhiang, "that your
taste inclines more to poetry what if you com-
pose some verses to these rhymes? We will excuse
you then the three cups."
" A piece of verse for three cups ! How could
you think of making such a bargain?" exclaimed
Tchangfanjou.
" I certainly am not able to drink," replied Sse
Yeoupe ; and if I have no other alternative, I
should prefer attempting the verses."
" Very well," said Wangwenhiang "we shall
now have a specimen of Mr Liansian's talent for
poetry, for he seems to be quite in the vein."
They then placed pen and ink before Sse Yeoupe.
The latter took up the pen; and, after casting his
eyes over the original piece once more, he wrote
these lines to the same rhymes :-
Now is the time when the breeze is softest, and the
shower is lighest
When the small buds shoot forth into branches in
a
morning's brief hour.
Like the mists that cling to the arch of yonder bridge,
are the thoughts that now issue in light verses.
How I pity the man that is condemned to dig gold from
the bowels of the earth !
The unsubstantial snow-drop descending from the hex-
vens, is as worthy of our thoughts
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
155
Should the wandering dove seek to bear to thee the feel-
ings of my heart,
I would say to her-" Go and count the silken fibres that
haug from yonder tree."
As soon as Sse Yeoupe finished his verses, he
handed them to the two young men, saying-" It was
certainly only to please you, and with great reluc-
tance, that I have composed these verses; but,
mind, you must not laugh at me."
The two friends were astonished by this effort;
for they observed that Sse Yeoupe, without once
stopping or reflecting for a moment, had rapidly
written on, and completed the piece almost in a
twinkling. They read the two stanzas, and were
struck at once with the easy flowing style which
characterized them, which was so decidedly su-
perior to the harsh and embarrassed lines of
their own compositions. They could not refuse
their commendations. "Young gentleman," said
they, "you certainly are a genuine poet, and we
must pay you the homage that is due to your
talents."
"My talent, gentlemen," answered Sse Yeoupe,
is very trifling, and the composition I have sub-
mitted to you is indeed but a middling perform-
ance. I cannot expect to approach the gold and
jasper of Mr Tchang."
" There is no occasion for this modesty," ob-
served Tchangfanjou. It is not my character to
be prone to panegyric; but I must say, that your
verses are not the less superior for having been com-
posed with so much expedition."
" It is the noble and elegant style of your own
verses, gentlemen," said Sse Yeoupe, " that has in-
156
JU-KIAO-LI :
spired me. But I have, I think, a claim upon Mr
Wang for a sight of his performance."
Wangwenhiang, laughing, said-" Excuse me,
but to-day I am not in the vein. To-morrow per-
haps, after I have seen the young lady, I may feel
more inclined to the task."
"So you have your plans arranged," said Sse
Yeoupe ; "but can this fair maiden be easily
seen ?"
" If you want to get a sight of her," answered
Wangwenhiang, " you will find no difficulty in gra-
tifying your curiosity: but she is a girl of such in-
tellect, that even your composition, I am afraid,
would scarcely have a chance of pleasing her. If
any portion of your poetical ardour remain, set
about composing another piece, and we shall pro-
ceed, all three, to visit her together."
" Shall I rely upon your word ?" said Sse
Yeoupe.
"Our friend Wang," interposed Tchangfanjou,
" is the very paragon of honest sincerity; I shall be
his security on the occasion. But come, you are
to make some new verses."
Sse Yeoupe's imagination was now excited by
wine, as well as by the hope of making himself ac-
ceptable to Miss Pe. The thoughts rushed upon
him with rapidity ; and seizing pen and paper, he
struck off a fresh composition on the "Spring Wil-
lows," adopting the same rhymes as before.
The two friends were perfectly amazed at his
quickness; they said nothing, although they were
internally convinced that this was a poet of the
very first order. The stanza ran thus:-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
157
Now is the time when the willow puts on its verdant
covering;
Ye apricot blossoms ! hang down your heads with shame;
wither and fall down with spite;
For ye must envy those beauteous branches that, aloft
in air,
Wave their luxuriant honours with the grace and freedom
of nature;
They whose tints and bending heads invite to medi-
tation,
Do they not attract the thoughts of the lovely one that
is near them ?
Would ye that this tree should wait till the silk-worm
shall give to it its vernal clothing ?
Every leaf, every bough, forms the garment in which it is
enveloped.
After they had read the verses through, each
struck the table in a transport of admiration, and
exclaimed, " What beautiful verses ! how poetical
how truly exquisite!"
"Gentlemen, I do not deserve those praises,"
said Sse Yeoupe ; "for my mind is confused by all
you have made me drink ; but I rely upon you
now to give me an opportunity of seeing this young
lady?"
" We have agreed to do so," said Wang; "but
you forgot to tell us one thing: you do not seem to
be a native of this place ; you will have no objection
to inform us what country you come from, and what
is your business in this quarter ?"
"I am from Kinling," answered Sse Yeoupe ;
"I am going to Keouyoung on business. I hap-
pened to be benighted on my way, and was under
the necessity of asking shelter in yonder convent.
158
JU-KIAO-LI:
Enjoying just now a moonlight walk, I wandered
thither by accident, and had the good fortune to
form your agreeable acquaintance."
6. From Kinling?" said Tchang. "That town is
but a few miles off; we are townsmen then; you
presented yourself, I think, at the provincial exami-
nation this year ; so we are fellow students. Do
you happen to know, sir, in your town, one doctor
Gou, sirnamed Kouei ?"
" You mean Gou Touian," said Sse; " but why
do you ask me that question?"
"I have heard a great deal about him," answered
Tchang, "and I entertain the highest respect for
his character. My motive for asking you about
him is, that I wish to make him a visit."
"I only know him very slightly," said Sse
Yeoupe ; "but we are not on good terms."
What is the reason?" inquired the other.
" He has a daughter," replied See Yeoupe, 'that
he wanted me to marry; but finding that her pre-
tensions to beauty were of a very moderate descrip-
tion indeed, I begged to decline the proposal; and
ever since a coolness exists between us."
"I am satisfied, sir," said Wang, "that the capi-
tal is the only place fit for you; you will not be
able to meet anywhere in the smaller towns and
villages the meritorious person that would be worthy
of you. For the present, I am happy that you are
accommodated at the convent of Kouanyin ; to-
morrow we shall all go and visit this fair lady."
It had been Sse Yeoupe's intention to set out,
next morning, for Keouyoung, there to procure a
prayer to be said in his behalf, and then to return
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
159
with despatch to the place where his uncle's bark
was moored; but the prospect of having an oppor-
tunity of seeing Miss Pe was quite sufficient to
make him change his purpose; and forgetting
every engagement, he thought only of her, her
charms, and her genius. The three companions
could think of nothing, could speak of nothing, but
this charming maiden; and thus drinking and dis-
coursing together upon a theme so congenial to all,
they remained sitting until the moon had nearly
disappeared. Wang and Tchang then led Sse
Yeoupe to the garden door. "Remember," said
the latter, as he took his leave, "remember our
engagement to-morrow! !"
" We shall not fail," said they, as they retired.
It was now about the third watch and the moon
was approaching the horizon. Sse Yeoupe, as he
slowly sought the convent, was agitated with various
thoughts. " I believed," said he to himself, " that
it was a difficult thing to discover an accomplished
woman; I would have readily gone to the ends of
the earth to have found one: now, I have but just
walked out, and the very first thing I stumble upon
is this long wished-for object. What a happiness !
It is almost sufficient for the period of three lives.
And yet, let me pause awhile true, she is found
but is it quite so certain that I shall have an oppor-
tunity of seeing her to-morrow? What if I am
made only the prey of vain fancies? Well, but
then she is in existence! Though flood and fire
oppose me, I am resolved to see her, or perish in
the attempt."
160
JU-KIAO-LI :
Absorbed in reflections such as these, Sse Yeoupe
remained awake until the fifth watch , and then he
fell into a profound sleep.
In the tranquil enjoyment of a refreshing slumber
we now leave Sse Yeoupe, and return to his uncle
Sse, the inspector-general, whom we left, as it will
be remembered, in expectation of his nephew's ap-
proach. The servants whom he had sent with the
message, the purport and results of which have
been already unfolded, had returned with the news
that master Sse Yeoupe was following them, and
would very soon arrive. The old man was quite
overjoyed; and as soon as he saw the baggage of
his nephew, he told the servants not to bring up
supper until the latter arrived. The time for light-
ing the lanterns came, without bringing any tidings
of Sse Yeoupe. The guards had already struck the
eleventh hour, and the first watch had begun ; but
still no news of the expected visitor had come to
dissipate the apprehensions of old Sse. "Doubt-
less," thought he, it must be business that de-
tained him; to-morrow I dare say he will be here
without fail." He quietly proceeded to despatch
his supper, after which he retired to bed.
The inspector, finding that his nephew did not
arrive next morning, ordered one of the grooms who
had waited on Sse Yeoupe the preceding day, to
go back to the same place. The servant galloped
almost the whole way and on his return, informed
his master, that upon inquiring of the person who
had the care of master Sse's apartments, where the
young gentleman was, the old man declared that he
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
161
had set out the evening before, at the same time as
the baggage, and that he could not divine what was
the cause of his not arriving before that time at his
uncle's.
The inspector-general now became very much
alarmed, and inquired if his nephew might not have
been detained by improper company. He called
the servant who had brought the baggage, and
minutely examined him. "Pray," said he, "my
man, when your master stayed at home, and when
he was not engaged in business, what sort of .com-
pany did he keep Was he addicted to gambling
and loose society
"My young master," replied the servant, "liked
neither. His only pastime was reading, unless he
occasionally went to look at some flowers in the
morning, or at night to enjoy the light of the moon.
With the exception of now and then composing
verses, and indulging in a few cups of wine, these
were the only amusements in which he ever took
any pleasure. He used to be fond of the society of
two young fellow-students ; but since his degree of
bachelor was taken from him, he has given up even
the society of his friends."
"How is it, if your young master is so given to
study, and has no taste for gambling and company,-
how is it," inquired the uncle, "that he has been
deprived of his bachelor's degree
"Some time ago," answered the servant, the
examiner came and placed my young master, after
the examination, at the head of the list. Now there
was a certain great gentleman quite taken with my
young master's abilities, and he wished to make
him his son-in-law ; but he, for some reason or
162
JU-KIAO-LI:
another, refused. The great man got vexed, and
complained to the examiner. It unfortunately so
happened, that this gentleman and the examiner
were old acquaintances and fellow-students so that
the examiner put himself also into a great passion,
and without more ado he struck my poor young
master off the bachelor's roll."
This intelligence caused old Sse to sigh fre-
quently, and utter exclamations of anger.
Messengers were now sent, in various directions,
in quest of Sse Yeoupe. Five days of fruitless
pursuit were already spent, when the inspector-
general, mortified at the disappointment, was
obliged to set sail.
They who are curious to know what befell Sse
Yeoupe, will learn it in the following chapter.
CHAPTER VII.
A FALSE NAME OCCASIONS THE LOSS OF A PEARL
TO A POET.
" This marriage is a devil of an affair. Who is it that can produce con-
cord without a world of trouble ? The flower has but a moment to
blow; and the full moon herself shews spots on her disk. Pleasure as
well as geuius is allied to love ; but jealousy and anger raise up tem-
pests. In truth, it is not man that creates obstacles: it is heaven and
how can we help it!"
UNDER the influence of wine, Tchang had thought
lessly imparted to Sse Yeoupe everything about
Miss Pe but when he called to mind, next day, the
marked interest which the young gentleman ap-
peared to take in her behalf, and especially when
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
163
he remembered the superior verses which the lat-
ter had written to the prescribed rhymes, he be-
gan to reflect on the consequences of what had
passed, and saw reason to repent his indiscretion.
He repaired to the pavilion with the view of con-
sulting Wang. As he entered the garden, he saw
this young man walking at a little distance; and his
disturbed appearance and manner announced the
inward conflict by which his mind was agitated.
My friend Wang," said Tchang, accosting him,
" why so thoughtful ?"
The latter made no reply. Tchang now stood
before him in his path. The countenance of Wang
was red with passion. Well," said he, " for a
pair of intelligent folks, I think we have committed
a sad blunder!"
" How is that ?" inquired Tchang.
" Why, last night, what reason had we to un-
bosom ourselves to this young man, this Sse ? He
was neither friend nor relation nothing to us be-
yond an acquaintance of the moment. He is, re-
member, both young and handsome, and as for
verses, his compositions are excellent. Now, if we
permit him to come with us, I doubt that he may not
supplant us."
" It was only this moment," observed Tchang,
" that I was lamenting what had happened; and
I came to know from you what is best to be
done."
" A word once uttered cannot be recalled," said
Wang.
"Last night," replied Tchang, "my head was
somewhat confused, and I can scarce tell how his
verses read in comparison with my own. Just take
164
JU-KIAO-LI:
them, and let us examine their merits a little more
closely."
They proceeded to peruse the verses; and the
more they examined them, the more beautiful they
appeared. Alternately they looked at each other,
and then at the verses. "Well," said Tchang,
"after sifting the piece thoroughly, I confess I
think they are a little better than my own. Let us
then take each one of the compositions; and if any
glory is to flow from them, let us take advantage
of the opportunity, and appropriate it to ourselves.
Should this Sse come to inquire for us, it will
be easy to desire the servant to tell him that
we are not at home; and there will be an end
of it."
" When I asked him yesterday to compose the
second piece," said Wang, " it was with a view to
this very plan; but I see, upon reflection, that
this course will be attended with some incon-
venience."
What inconvenience can there be in it ?" asked
Tchang.
" I perceive," answered his companion, " that
this Sse Liansian is a young man of an ardent tem-
perament, and fond of pleasure. If we do not take
him with us, it is not likely that, having once got
the scent, he will give up the pursuit. He will
doubtless make inquires, and ultimately will gain
access to the young lady by himself. Suppose he
succeeds thus far, these two pieces of verse will be
forthcoming; and an exposure of the truth, you
must admit, would be extremely unpleasant."
ob You are perfectly right," observed Tchang :
" but listen to my expedient: what is to prevent us
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
165
from prevailing with the old door-keeper Toung to
repulse Sse Liansian, in case he should come there,
prevent him from seeing any one within, and refuse
to give him back the verses? Will he get wings,
do you imagine, to enter the house ?"
"This is an excellent plan," replied the other;
"
but if he does not recover back his verses, and
if he finds all avenues closed against him, his de-
termination will still continue. Better to bring him
with us, and act openly."
"
How act openly?" cried Tchangfanjou.
You and I will take these two copies," said
Wang. "Let your name be upon one, and mine
on the other; we then put Sse Liansian's name
upon the verses which you composed yester-
day. We must take care to go beforehand to
the old porter, and arrange with him to say,
when we all come, that his master Pe is not at
home. He will then keep the verses altogether
and whenever afterwards Sse Liansian shall call,
the porter will give him the same answer, still re-
taining whatever the young man may deliver to
him. Thus, as he is a stranger, the recurrence of
the disappointment may have the effect of causing
dissatisfaction and disgust in his mind. But now
we must transcribe the verses."
Tchang was quite overjoyed at the proposal.
This is most admirably projected," said he ;
but it requires to be carried into execution with-
out loss of time. Whom shall we send to the old
porter?"
"This is a confidential affair," said Wang;
" whom should you employ? I must go myself
166
JU-KIAO-LI:
but this old fellow is fond of money, and I should
have with me some cash."
" In a great undertaking like this, expense is no
object," observed the other: "here are two ounces
for him; and promise that, when the business
is over, his services shall be handsomely acknow-
ledged."
"Two ounces are a good deal," said Wang ;
but the old rascal has covetous eyes. If he do
not take up the matter heartily, we cannot expect to
succeed: let him have three ounces at once for a
gratuity. We may have occasion for his assistance
by-and-by."
Tchang, finding that he could not escape from
this demand, very reluctantly set about weighing
three ounces, which he enclosed in a sealed paper.
He then copied one of Sse Yeoupe's compositions
very accurately on a handsome sheet of flower
paper, and signed it with his own name. He next
made Wang transcribe the verses which he him-
self had written, and subscribe the name of "Sse
Liansian" to them. He finally formed the whole
into a packet, which he placed in his sleeve, and
proceeded on the way to Kinchi.
It may be convenient to state, that the porter
Toung had been long a domestic in Pe's family.
His name was Toungyoung, and he was sirnamed
Siaothsiouan. Money was his god, and wine the
joy of his soul. He would give his heart's blood
for gold, and his head for a cup of wine, at any
time. Let but a person approach him with a pitcher
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
167
of wine and a little money, and there was not an
incident connected with the house that he would
not freely communicate. It was to his kindness
that Wang was indebted for a copy of Miss Pe's
verses on the " Spring Willows."
On the present occasion, when Wang went to
look for him, he found the old man before the door,
secretly counting down some money to a little boy
whom he was sending for some wine. Wang came
behind him unperceived, and tapping him gently on
the shoulder with his fan, accosted him thus:
" There you are, my jolly old fellow "
The porter turned round hastily, and recognising
Wang, began to laugh; " Is it you, my master ?"
he exclaimed. " Jolly indeed ! so well I may,
when master Wang condescends to come and see
me."
" To be sure you are jolly," replied Wang "and
I am come to be merry with you too."
The porter, now perceiving from the tone of his
voice, that Wang had something to say to him, sent
away the little boy. He then accompanied the young
man along the street some distance, when they
turned into a bye lane together, and proceeded to
a small house, where they sat down to confer.
" Now, Mr Wang, what is your business with me?"
inquired the porter.
" Why," replied the other, " it is about some
verses to the same rhymes as those you re-
member, the other day, on the Spring Willows. I
have just a slight favour to ask of you respecting
them."
" Certainly, certainly," said the old man. "As
the rhymes are filled up, if you want to see my
168
JU-KIAO-LI:
master, you have only to remain where you are
a moment; he is going out to-day : wait until we
see him pass the door, and we can then both speak
to him. In this way you can have an interview
with him."
"It is not at all requisite for me to see him," ob-
served Wang. "It is only necessary that you
should take the trouble of executing a small com-
mission for me,-that is all."
" That is still more easy," said the porter.
"
Yes, it is easy enough," rejoined Wang; ' but
there is notwithstanding a little difficulty in the
matter, which I require your assistance to get
over."
" What can it be?" eagerly inquired the old
man. "For if any service lies in my power, I
shall be happy to render it."
Wang now drew from his sleeve the two sheets
of flower paper which he had bound up together.
" Here," said he, "are two sets of verses; the
one composed by my friend Mr Tchang, the other
by a Mr Sse, a companion of ours. Put them
into your sleeve; and when these two gentlemen
shall come to you with any verses, take them, and
say that your master is not at home. Observe,
and throw aside the verses which they shall bring
to you : but those two copies which I now place in
your hands, you will take care and have submitted
to the inspection of your master and young mis-
tress. This is the service which I have to request
you will do for me."
" At the outset, I confess to you," said the old
porter, laughing, "I thought that some queer pro-
ject or other was on foot; but since you are the
OR, THE TWO GOUSINS.
169
person engaged in it, master Wang, I cannot refuse
anything. However, I hope I may rely on you in
case any mischief happens."
Wang had already, on the way, given the porter
one ounce. He now presented him with the re-
maining two, observing-"This is a little present
which my friend Tchang begs you will accept.
When the affair is brought to a successful ter-
mination, there remains still a large mass of sil-
ver
The porter drew out his purse, and getting up,
he said, As I have received this mark of your
friend's kindness, master Wang, you and I shall
now go to a tavern hard by, which has been lately
opened, just to see how things go on."
" It would give me the greatest pleasure," said
Wang, 66 to go with you; but my friend Tchang is
waiting to hear some news from me. We must re-
turn together and we have now no time to lose.
At another opportunity I shall come and invite you
myself."
" Well, well-as you are not at liberty to-day,"
observed the old man, "I must not go drink either.
We should not let wine interfere with our duties to
one another."
You are too kind, and we are very much in-
debted to you," replied Wang, taking his leave of
the porter. He hastened to Tchang, who was im-
patiently expecting him. Well," said the lat-
ter, advancing to meet him, "have you seen our
friend ?"
170
JU-KIAO-LI:
" Yes, and all is right," exclaimed Wang in re-
ply. " I just met him as I came to the door.
But how is it that young Sse has not yet been
seen ?"
Wang had scarcely uttered these words, when
he saw Sse Yeoupe approach, accompanied by
Siaohi.
Sse Yeoupe had been kept awake during a consi-
derable part of the night by the conflicting thoughts
which agitated his mind it was not until the ap-
proach of morning that he was enabled to procure
any sleep, and hence he did not rise until the day
was somewhat advanced. As soon as he had
finished his breakfast, and made his toilet, he re-
paired to Tchang's garden, where he found the two
friends. After they had saluted each other, Tchang
inquired the reason why Sse Yeoupe had been so
late.
" Gentlemen," said the latter, " 'your kind re-
ception of me, last night is the cause; you made
me drink too much, and that has made ine break
my appointment with you this morning. I beseech
you to excuse me."
Wang began to laugh. "Oh! I presume," said
he, that you feel no longer any curiosity about
seeing Miss Pe?"
" Why, gentlemen," said Sse Yeoupe, "if you
have no wish yourselves upon the subject, I do not
want to see her."
"But if we are to go at all," replied Tchang,
" the hour is come : let us not lose time in unne-
cessary conversation."
"My rhymes are not yet completed," said Wang;
" so that I have nothing to give. Hasten, gentle-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
171
men, with your copies. If either of you come
back with favourable news, it is right that we
should have plenty of wine provided against your
return."
The party entered the pavilion, when Tchang
and Sse Yeoupe each transcribed the verses which
they had composed respectively the evening before,
after which they placed them in their sleeves.
Tchang then put on a robe of a colour suited to
the season, and ordered his servant to bring out
three horses. The young men mounted, and
leaving the garden, proceeded in the direction of
Kinchi.
The distance of that town from Pechi, where they
then were, did not exceed three or four miles. The
party very speedily, therefore, accomplished their
short journey, and stopped before Pe's gate. They
descended from their horses, and walked up to he
entrance, where they were met, as had been pre-
viously arranged, by the old porter Toung.
"What is your pleasure, gentlemen ?" said he, ac-
costing them.
Wang stepped forward. " These gentlemen,"
he answered, " Messieurs Tchang and Sse, are come
to visit your master."
They should have been here," returned the
porter, " a quarter of an hour sooner : my master is
gone to dine in town; but if you have any com-
mands for him, you may leave them with me."
" We have no occasion to speak to him," ob-
served Tchang ; " but having learned that he
wishes to obtain verses on the Spring Willows, this
young gentleman and myself have composed some
172
JU-KIAO-LI:
on the subject, and we are desirous of having his
opinion upon them."
" If it be verses that you bring," answered
Toung, you have only to leave them. When my
master returns, he shall have them; and no doubt
he will then make an appointment with you."
Tchang asked Sse Yeoupe what they should do.
" Shall we leave the verses now," said he, " or wait
until we can see Pe himself?"
" An interview would be better, certainly," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe ; "but can we not return here?"
"My master dines abroad to-day," said the por-
ter ; "and I am afraid that he will come back too
late to be able to receive your visit."
"Then leave the verses," said Wang. "What oc-
casion is there for an interview?
The other two then gave their verses into the
porter's care, requesting of him, when his master
returned, to recommend them to his attention.
"Most certainly," replied Toung. "But, gen-
tlemen, where is it you live? For undoubtedly, when
my master has read your verses, he will want to
know your address."
Wang informed him that Tchang was an inhabi-
tant of the town of Tanyang, and that the flower
garden where he had set up his study was down in
the village of Pechi. Mr Sse, he said, was for the
present residing in the convent of Kouanyin in the
same village.
" At Pechi ?" said the porter. "That is not far
off; we shall now know where to send to you when
you shall be wanted."
The three young men then remounted their horses,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
173
and after repeating their injunctions to the old
man, set off for the village of Pechi ; and there,
after having seen them safely arrived, we shall
take leave of them for the present.
The porter returned to his lodge, and put aside
the compositions which had been just placed in his
hands: he then took the verses which had been pre-
viously left with him by Wang, and went with them
to his master.
Pe little thought, when he had affected indispo-
sition in order to retreat to the country, that he
would have found, in the obscurity of this village,
the description of son-in-law which he had so long
anxiously sought. His daughter had produced a
little piece on the Spring Willows, and he thought
it would be a good way of finding out some person
of merit, if he were to receive verses on the same
subject with the same rhymes.
It happened about this time that a distant rela-
tion had brought to him a nephew whom Pe con-
sented to bring up as his own son. This boy was
just fifteen, his name was Kitsou, and his sirname
Yinglang; but in point of understanding his pre-
tensions were very feeble indeed: he would do no-
thing but mope about, and waste his time. When
a book was placed in his hands, he forthwith fell
sick, and remained indisposed the whole day. Pe
entertained towards him no other regard than that
which a person can scarcely avoid feeling for a re-
lation. He had nevertheless kept the boy with
him, and thought it useless to take any pains
about him.
At the precise period of which we speak, Pe was
seated in the pavilion of rural dreams, to enjoy the
174
JU-KIAO-L1:
sight of flowers, when he saw the old porter ap-
proach with the two compositions on the Spring Wil-
lows. He unfolded one; and after having cast his
eyes over it, he exclaimed laughing, Is it possi-
ble that there can be such a blockhead under hea-
ven, as to compose verses like these, and address
them to me?" He looked at it again, and seeing
that it was signed by Sse Liansian, he threw it away.
He took the next paper, and perused it; when, sur-
prised at what he had read, he broke out into ex-
pressions of admiration. " What exquisite verses
said he. He read the composition again. "This
shews extraordinary talent," said he : " it is a long
time since anything like that, has come before me;
whose can this be ?" And hastily looking towards
the signature, he observed the words, "composed
by Tchang Outche of Tanyang."
The appearance of such an inscription tended to
increase very considerably the astonishment of
Pe. " Tanyang," said he, "is but a little town
close by ; how is it possible that such genius as
this indicates could lie buried there?" He hastily
called a waiting-maid, and desired her to go and call
Miss Pe.
The young lady quickly obeyed her father's direc-
tions, and as she entered the pavilion, he met her
with a smiling air. " What do you think, my
child?" said he. "I have to-day found out a hus-
band worthy of you."
" Who is he, and where have you met him ?"
were the eager inquiries of Houngiu.
A couple of young men have just left two com-
positions on the Spring Willows: the first of them is
nonsense; the other shews the hand of a superior
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
175
poet." He then gave to his daughter the verses
bearing the signature of Tchang.
The young lady having read the two stanzas,
said that it certainly was a composition that be-
trayed an exquisite taste and genius. " No one but
a man of extrordinary talent," said she, could have
written it: but have you, my dear father, yet seen
the author?"
Ihave not seen him," answered Pe; "but judging
from the verses, he must be a person of very unusual
merit."
Houngiu again looked at the verses. "The more
I consider them," said she, "the more I am con-
vinced that the author must be a distinguished and
accomplished person, a poet equal to Litaipe him-
self. But his writing is very inferior: it is heavy
and vulgar. It appears to me to betray different
hands, and my only fear is that it is the transcript
by a blockhead of some other person's composi-
tion. It is necessary that you should look carefully
to this circumstance."
" Very proper," said Pe. "I shall invite the
author to-morrow to visit me, and try him upon
some other subject. We shall then be able to dis-
cover the truth."
"That is the surest way," said Houngiu.
Pe then sent for Toung, and desired him to take
at an early hour the next morning a visiting card,
and go with it to invite Mr Tchang to his house."
And Mr Sse, am I to invite him too ?" asked
the porter.
"Invite him, indeed !" said Pe, laughing. "What
nonsense the old man talks."
Toung precipitately left the pavilion; and Pe,
176
JU-KIAO-LI:
giving the verses with Sse Liansian's name to his
daughter, said Cast your eyes over this, did you
ever behold anything so impudent?"
Houngiu could not read them without laughing
and for some time they formed a subject of amuse-
ment to father and daughter.
Meanwhile, upon the return of the three young
men from Kinchi, Tchang prevailed upon Sse
Yeoupe to remain and dine with him in his garden.
When the latter returned to the convent at night,
he was accosted by Tsingin. " And where is it
that master Sse has dined to-day?"
I proposed to return this morning at an early
hour," replied Sse Yeoupe ; " but last night,
taking a moon light walk, I encountered two young
gentlemen Tchang and Wang, who kept me to com-
pose verses with rhymes furnished by Miss Pe, on
the subject of the Spring Willows. This morning
we all went with our compositions to Kinchi; and I
know not how it was, but the day slided away im-
perceptibly."
"With your accomplishments and capacity, sir,
you are worthy of the hand of Miss Pe: and
doubtless you will fully realize the expectations
which her father would wish to see verified in the
person of his son-in-law."
I am rather indifferent as to people's opinions
about my appearance," replied Sse Yeoupe. "AN
I know is, that whilst in your house, my good mas-
ter, I put you to great inconvenience and trou-
ble; and that, I assure you, gives me much un-
easiness."
"How can you talk in this strain? If you were
to stop for a whole year, it would produce no in-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
177
convenience whatever. I am only concerned that
the limited means of our convent do not allow us
to entertain you in a suitable manner."
" I am grateful to you for your kindness," said
Sse Yeoupe, "as indeed my thanks should be un-
bounded if it should be my lot to obtain the
least promotion, my first care will be to repay your
goodness."
Hear me, master Sse, it may be your fortune
to-morrow to contract an alliance with his excel-
lency Pe-then the two families shall be united in
one wherefore should you not be an acceptable
guest here ? You must sup with us to-night."
"No supper for me," replied Sse Yeoupe. "I
shall have one cup of tea, and then go to bed."
Tsingin ordered tea to be served up to Sse Yeoupe,
after which they separated for the night.
Next morning, when Sse Yeoupe rose, his mind
was entirely occupied in expecting an answer to
his verses. He finished his toilet without delay,
and was just setting out to look for Tchang, when
Tsingin entered, accompanied by his two com-
panions of the former day. "Here, gentlemen,"
said Tsingin, " is master Sse's apartment."
Sse Yeoupe advanced to meet the party.
" What master Sse," said Tchang laughing, " you
look quite blooming this morning; your verses then
have succeeded, have they ?"
" How should I expect to be so fortunate?" said
Sse- Yeoupe. "The prize ought to belong to you,
master Tchang."
" Gentlemen," interposed Wang, good humour-
edly, "your language on both sides is certainly
marked by the greatest modesty but heaven only
178
JU-KIAO-LI:
knows what is passing in your hearts; that, how-
ever, I leave to yourselves."
They all began to laugh, and whilst they were
thus pleasantly conversing together, a messenger
arrived to say that one of Pe's servants was wait-
ing in Tchang's garden with an invitation to that
gentleman.
Tchang, on hearing this intelligence, was not
more agreeably surprised than if an imperial envoy
had been despatched to tell him that he had obtained
the first place at the general examination of learned
men. Almost overcome with joy, he said to the
messenger: "And has not master Sse been invited
too Rascal that you are, you must not have
taken your message properly."
" The servant stated particularly that he came to
invite master Tchang only," said the messenger.
" I am satisfied still," observed Tchang, " that
he came to invite us both."
" He certainly said nothing of an invitation to
master Sse," declared the servant.
Sse Yeoupe was perfectly confounded at this news.
" How can it be," said he to himself, " that this
man should be invited It is very strange." But
putting on a feigned appearance of tranquillity, he
addressed Tchang: "It must be to you alone that
the invitation was sent; if there were any com-
mands for me, it is to the convent they would have
been directed."
" If there be any doubt in the matter," observed
Wang, let us all go at once to the garden, and
we can learn the truth without a moment's hesita-
tion."
The companions proceeded to the pavilion in
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
179
Tchang's garden, where they found old Toung
seated; and after they had bid him a good morning,
he said to Tchang, " I yesterday fulfilled your
commission, sir; when my master returned, I gave
him the verses, and he read them twice or thrice
with my young lady in the pavilion of rural
dreums. He praised exceedingly your talents, and
said that they could not be equalled in the empire;
he finally caused me to come here and invite you
to visit him."
The porter then presented Tchang with a visit-
ing card, on which was written, "Pe Hiouan has
the honour to present his respects to you." Joy
sparkled in the countenance and eyes of the young
man, and he ordered breakfast to be brought.
Wang maliciously inquired of the porter, if his
master had yet seen Sae's verses.
" Certainly I gave them to him, and he read
them first," replied Toung. "See them! why not?"
" Well, but if he has seen them, has he said
nothing of them?" inquired Tchang.
I suppose," answered Toung, "that he was
very much delighted with them; for as soon as he
read them, he burst out laughing."
"If he was so pleased then," observed Tchang,
" why did he not invite master Sse to see him? ?"
" I put the question to him, if I was to ask
master Sse; but I only got a very good scolding
for doing so. It may be his wish to invite the
young gentleman some other day; I cannot tell, I
am sure."
Tchang wanted to keep the old man to break-
fast; but the latter refused, saying, "My master
is very strict, and I should be afraid to keep him
180
JU-KIAO-LI:
waiting. If it be in your power, I should be very
glad, master Tchang, that you would accompany
me as soon as possible."
" Your advice is best," replied Tchang; ' but,
my good old friend, this is your first visit here;
will you go away without taking something?"
"I am exceedingly obliged to you, sir," said
Toung: "I shall certainly at some future opportu-
nity take the liberty of troubling you; at present I
cannot stay."
"You are very right, my old friend," observed
Wang. " Master Tchang is an excellent fellow;
but at present we must cut short our meal."
Tchang retired for a moment, and folding up an
ounce, gave it to the porter. "Here," said he :
"time presses; we must yield to necessity."
Toung made a shew of refusing the compliment,
but ultimately accepted the silver.
Sse Yeoupe then rose to depart. "You must not
leave us," said Tchang; "I am only going to see Mr
Pe for a moment, and shall be back immediately. I
dare say I shall not be kept long. Hisexcellency, I
presume, only wants to put us both to the test:
who knows ?"
"You are right," observed Wang. "I shall keep
master Sse company until your return; ; so set off
quickly, and do not be long."
Sse Yeoupe agreed to stay. Tchang dressed him-
self in a new robe of rich stuff; and having loaded
himself with a number of little articles as intro-
ductory presents, he ordered two horses to be get
in readiness, the one for himself, and the other for
the porter. He then bade farewell to his two com-
panions, and took the direction of Kinchi, secretly
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
181
rejoicing at his good fortune. Truth requires it to
be stated, that he certainly did assume a variety
of airs which were not observable in his conduct
the evening before.
What happened upon the visit of Tchang to
his excellency Pe, may be learned in the following
chapter.
CHAPTER VIII.
A WAITING MAID AT A SIDE GLANCE DETECTS
THE COARSE STUFF.
" It is difficult to protect ourselves against being imposed upon by
falsehood, particularly when it is got up on a basis of truth. But the
precious flower is known by its perfume. The sparkling colours of the
imitation stone may take for a short time : but the glow of the ruby can
never be mistaken. Rich clothes cannot couceal a clown. Beauty
should ever be the reward of talent. Of what use to a fool is all the
trouble he gives himself ?"
A VERY short time brought Tchang and his com-
panion, the old porter, to Pe's residence. As soon
as they alighted, the young gentleman was intro-
duced by Toung into the reception-room, where he
begged of him to take a seat. Toung then pro-
ceeded to apprize his master of the young gentle-
man's arrival and Pe waited not a moment to make
his appearance, and give a suitable reception to his
guest. As he entered the apartment, and surveyed
the person of his visitor, he felt not a little disap-
pointed. The countenance and general appearance
of Tchang were decidedly of the vulgar cast. He
182
JU-KIAO-LI:
seemed to be wholly wrapped up in himself, whilst
a mingled expression of lurking cunning and bold
assurance sat upon his features. He certainly had
anything but the air of a person who was capable
of composing verses. His ill-formed shoulders and
disproportioned corpulent frame, shewed that he
belonged to some other than the well-bred classes
of society: and the most indifferent spectator could
not fail to see a very rascal depicted in his haggard
eye and contracted brow.
Suspicion instantly flashed across Pe's mind.
" Surely," thought he, "this person has nothing of
the appearance of a poet." However, after having
invited the young man, Pe could do no less than
give him the best reception. As soon as Tchang
observed him come into the apartment, he advanced
in haste to make his reverence: and then taking
out the presents which he had brought with him,
he offered them to Pe. The latter, having chosen a
couple of articles of different sorts, laid them on
one side, and begged of his guest to take a seat,
which the latter, in his excessive modesty, made a
shew of declining for some time. At length they
both sat down in those relative places which cus-
tom assigned to them on the occasion. "I yester-
day," began the host, " had the pleasure of receiv-
ing the beautiful composition which you were so
good as to send me. Every word in it is gold or
jasper. It gave me such delight, that I could scarcely
drag myself from it."
" My studies have been very limited," replied
Tchang; " and my talents are but middling. But
I had the good fortune, in this instance, to have had
a sable for my model. I am inexpressibly alarmed
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
183
indeed : for I must have had a heart the size of
a bushel to have sent you such paltry verses as
these."
" I observed by your manuscript, yesterday,
that you are an inhabitant of Tanyang. This place
is in the neighbourhood ; how is it that, possessing
such merit as you do, your name has never reached
me! ?"
" My house is at Tanyang," replied Tchang
" but just opposite to the village of Kinchi I have
a small garden, where I retire to devote myself to
study ; and I spend but little time in the village. I
am naturally disinclined to keep up any intercourse
with the world, and hence my name has not been
able to reach you."
"
Oh ! I see that you are a determined man of
letters, wholly bent upon perfecting yourself. There
are very few indeed like you."
Tea was now served by Pe's orders, after which
he resumed the conversation. "My young friend,"
he continued, "when I invited you to come and visit
me to-day, it was entirely on account of the very
great pleasure which I derived from your verses.
My only regret is, that I have not more specimens
of them. Will you have the goodness to write
a piece or two before me ? I trust that you are
not too chary of that jasper, and those pearls
which have so taken my old fancy." And having
uttered these words, he ordered pens and paper to
be brought.
Tchang had hoped that by loquacity and a bold
184
JU-KIAO-L1:
tone he would have been able to produce an im-
pression ; but the moment Pe mentioned the pro-
posal to write verses in his presence, the unfortu-
nate young man felt like one who was struck sud-
denly with a thunderbolt. His spirit seemed at
once to have vanished from his body, and for a few
moments his tongue was absolutely palsied with
fear. He would have refused, but the servants had
already set down the writing-table. Pens, ink, paper,
and every necessary accommodation, were now
placed before him in the most convenient manner
possible. Tchang was perfectly stupified, and even
after a little time was only able to drawl out,
"A poor scholar like myself would not presume to
yield to his - inspirations before such a person as
your excellency. I could never get on with the
seven syllabic metre before you : and I am certain
that I should only make you laugh at my ex-
pense."
Well, but surely," said Pe, " to try one's
pen a little before company, is an amusement
of which literary men are very fond. Had I
a subject in my mind, and if I were once moved
by it, I assure you I should not so easily let it es-
cape. Come, you must not really be so excessively
modest."
Tchang saw that his evasive excuses were utterly
ineffectual. His cheek burned, his senses were be-
wildered; and after stammering a good deal, it was
with difficulty that he was able to articulate these
few words: "I must make an essay, I see-will
your excellency be so good as to give me a subject ?
And after that, I must be an humble suitor to you
for instructions how to proceed."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
185
Pe took a moment to consider. "Ay," said he,
" we cannot have a better theme than what you have
already written upon, the Spring Willows. You
have complied in the most agreeable and ingenious
manner with the conditions that were prescribed.
So, unless you have any objection yourself, let this
composition be upon the same subject and with the
same rhymes."
Tchang's heart leaped with joy at this proposal,
for he luckily remembered the words of the second
piece which Sse Yeoupe had, with his accustomed
rapidity, written in the pavilion. His mind being
thus placed at ease, he resumed all the airs and
attitudes of a literary man. However he still
affected to wish to decline the task. "1 am but a
very awkward artist, I can assure your excellency,
at best; nevertheless, since you do me the honour
to press me so far, I do not think myself at liberty
to resist your orders. But I feel exceedingly em-
barrassed."
" Will you be so kind, sir, as to comply?
Tchang replied, "I suppose I must be so rash."
He then seized a pen, and took a sheet of paper,
which he spread before him. He next put on a
frowning look of momentary reflection, nodded sig-
nificantly twice, and began to write. When he com-
pleted the transcript, he rose, and carrying the
paper in both hands, presented it to Pe with a
profound reverence. The latter cast his eye over
the composition: he read it a second time, and was
not a little delighted to find that, in elegance and
poetical expression, it far outshone even its prede-
cessor. He remarked, nevertheless, that Tchang
did not allow himself a moment of reflection, and
186
JU-KIAO-LI:
that the piece had been completed with wonderful
rapidity. All the suspicions which had been sug-
gested in his mind by the clownish appearance of
his visitor, and the doubts which he had before that
entertained, were now entirely dissipated by a proof
of skill which could not be controverted. What
an exquisite genius !" broke out Pe. " What free-
dom, what glowing thoughts and expressions ! And
above all, what expedition ! You are the very being
I have been in quest of through the empire and
how nearly had I missed you!"
He returned again and again to the verses with
fresh admiration; and having called a servant, he,
unperceived, desired that they might be carried to
his daughter. He then ordered dinner to be served
in the garden behind the house, and requested
Tchang to stay and drink two or three cups with
him. The latter, with a great many acknow-
ledgments, wished to decline the honour. "You
have already sir," said he, "overpowered me with
marks of benevolence : your kindness has far sur-
passed my most sanguine expectations. It is not
becoming in me to abuse in this way your friendly
dispositions towards me."
"Poh, poh !" said Pe, " come along, let us know
each other better; you are far too formal :" and
taking Tchang by the arm, he led him towards the
garden. The young visitor's mind was divided be-
tween pleasure and dissatisfaction. He had occa-
sion for congratulation in the prosperous train in
which his matrimonial speculation appeared to be
placed; but then it was possible that some such
calamity might arise in the course of the evening
as an interesting subject for poetry, upon which his
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
187
powers might peremptorily be put in requisition.
This formidable anticipation, like an uncontrollable
demon, haunted his bosom, until they had been
some time in the garden. The mingling varieties
of tints which presented themselves in this place,
made it a truly charming retreat. Here the peach-
tree unfolded its crimson hues, and the willow its
golden pendants. Here might be seen the plum-
tree with its various blossoms, and the piony with
its unnumbered petals : and here the calyx of every
flower cherished its treasure of countless diamonds.
The screaming magpie, and the skimming swallow,
likewise united in the scene : the busy bee, and fan-
tastic butterfly, disported around. Spring reigned
in all her verdant splendor, and every breeze that
sighed along was laden with richest perfume.
Pe courteously led Tchang to those spots that
were most agreeable to the sight : and a stranger
might have inferred, from the elaborate politeness
which had been extended to this young man, that
his marriage was no longer a speculation, and that
the father at once admitted him to the confidence of
a son-in-law. The party now proceeded to where
the wine had been served, and began to drink and
converse together beneath the cooling shade of tall
flowers.
Whilst the gentlemen were thus engaged, Houn-
giu, who had been apprized of her father's inten-
tion to invite this young gentleman, as well as that
his purpose was to put his pretensions to the proof,
took care to employ a trusty woman of her own to
take an opportunity of making a sly observation in
the parlour. The name of this confidential person
188
JU-KIAO-L1
was Yansou; she was brought up from her infancy in
the service of Miss Pe ; she was naturally shrewd
and intelligent, and had just attained her fifteenth
year.
On this day, as soon as she had received the in-
structions of her young mistress, she proceeded to
execute her commission. She placed herself in a
convenient spot within sight of the apartment; and
thence, without being seen herself, she enjoyed an
opportunity of thoroughly observing the person of
Tchang. Nor did she quit her hiding-place until
the young man accompanied her master to the gar-
den. As soon as they retired, she went to her
young mistress, bringing with her the verses which
had been secretly given her by Pe for Houngiu's
perusal. "Well, well," said she peevishly, " this
good man is to be sure plain enough; his features
are vulgar and disagreeable: how can he be wor-
thy of you? Take care of him, Miss that's all
say."
"Has my father made him compose any verses ?"
inquired Houngiu.
" As for his verses, I believe he has composed
some: here they are," handing them to her mis-
tress.
The latter read them attentively, and said, " Cer-
tainly these are very charming : no one but a poet
of the first rank could write so well. How is it
that his appearance and his style correspond so
badly ?"
"Take my word for it, Miss, there must be some
knavery in this business."
" What knavery can there be ?" asked Houngiu.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
189
"Here are the verses written under my father's very
eye, and they are quite as beautiful as those of the
other day."
" Well, Miss, there is no accounting for people's
thoughts sometimes but his are not the eyes, I
swear, that would make a body wish to go back
and see them again. He a man of talent, in-
deed ! Why, not to mention such a lady as you are,
if he was to offer to marry myself, I would not have
a bit of him."
Did you hear if my father said anything when
he read the. verses ?"
" Your father," replied Yansou, "looks to the
verses, and not to the man. He said a great deal
about them. But my dear young lady, this is a
very serious business ; your whole life is con-
cerned in it ; and you should follow your inclina-
tions."
The ill-shapen and vulgar penmanship of the
copies which she read had staggered the mind of
Miss Pe with respect to Tchang; but Yansou's rhe-
toric completed the unfavourable impression. She
involuntarily breathed a heavy sigh. "I am parti-
cularly unfortunate," said she, addressing her maid.
"From my earliest childhood, it has been my father's
care to obtain a suitable husband for me ; and up to
this hour not a single suitor has presented him-
self that answers to his expectations. Yesterday
we thought, when we beheld the verses, that our
happiness was on the verge of being completely
secured : who would have anticipated such a mor-
tifying disappointment as the appearance of this
young man must excite?"
190
JU-KIAO-LI:
Yansou only laughed. "My dear lady," said
she; " why do you make yourself so unhappy?
Don't you know the proverb, ' the maid that waits
for marrying, will be happier far for tarrying?' Hea-
ven has given you talents and beauty : and some
time or other it will send a young man who in
person and mind will be worthy of you. You must
not then be disheartened ; you are not surely so
advanced in life. Why on earth are you in such
a hurry?"
At this moment Pe appeared, after having parted
with Tchang, coming to have an interview with his
daughter. As soon as she saw him, Houngiu ran
to meet him. "Well, child," said he to her, you
have seen, I dare say, the verses which Mr Tchang
has composed with such expedition."
"I have, sir," was the reply.
" I own, yesterday," said Pe, "I had my suspi-
cions of him; but to-day I put him to the proof
under my own eyes, and I observed that without
hesitation or reflection, as fast as the pen could
go, he composed his verses; he is a man of genuine
talent, no doubt."
"With respect to his talent, sir, I believe it
to be unexceptionable ; but does his person corre-
spond?"
" Now, that is certainly a singularity," replied
Pe ; " his person is not to be compared to his
talent."
Houngiu, at these words, held down her head
and was silent. Pe paused a moment, and then
addressed his daughter. "My child, if there be
the least reluctance in your mind, it would be in
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
191
vain to strive to overcome it. All I fear is, that if
we reject a man of such intellect as this, we
shall find it very difficult to meet with another."
Houngiu was still silent. At length Pe continued
My Houngiu, if there be any suspicions still
lurking in your mind, I have a plan in view which I
can have recourse to ; that is, to propose to this
young man to undertake the education of Yinglang.
That is the most effectual and decisive way of
coming at once to the truth, and ending the matter
one way or other."
"That will be the best way, sir," replied Houngiu.
Pe saw that he had now succeeded in tran-
quillizing his daughter's mind, and sending for
Toung the porter, he gave him these directions :
To-morrow you will tell my secretary to write a
private letter, and you will provide the customary
presents, with which you will go in my name to Mr
Tchang, the gentleman who has just departed, and
propose to him to come and superintend my son in
his studies."
Toung went as had been ordered, to get the letter
and the presents ready.
In the mean time Tchang was raised to a pitch
of enthusiastic joy by the reception, and by |the
proofs of friendly regard, which Pe had given him.
By the time he had returned home, the sun began
to assume a yellowish hue; he found before him
Sse Yeoupe and Wang, engaged together in argu-
ment. " Gentlemen, gentlemen," said he, I
have forfeited my word, I fear, with you; I have a
thousand apologies to make."
The two young men replied that the delay was
perfectly natural. "But," said they, " as Pe kept you
192
JU-KIAO-LI :
with him, something decisive, no doubt, has taken
place relative to your marriage ?"
Tchang, whose manner indicated the most com-
plete self-satisfaction, explained to his friends the
way in which he had been received, and how he had
been detained for dinner. He gave them a parti-
cular account of everything that had happened,
sinking the solitary circumstance of his being called
on to compose a second piece on the Spring Wil-
lows. As for the marriage," said he in conclu-
sion, "no formal promise has certainly passed ;
but I flatter myself that I have had decided evi-
dences of a very strong partiality."
"Then your marriage," returned Wang, is
more than decided."
Still some doubts clung to Sse Yeoupe's mind.
" Well, well," said he to himself, " if it be to such
a piece of verse as this man has composed, that the
prize is awarded, the young lady cannot certainly
be considered as very peculiarly endowed with poe-
tical instinct. But how is it'that she is capable of
composing such verses as she does, and yet that she
should not have succeeded in her choice of a hus-
band by this time ?"
However, Tchang appeared to be unfeignedly
happy at his success ; and Sse Yeoupe, finding his
situation become more unpleasant every moment,
begged permission to retire, which was soon ac-
corded to him by his host.
" A capital hit I have made to-day," said
Tchang in great glee to Wang, as soon as Sse
Yeoupe was out of sight; and he then confided to
his friend the whole history of the suppressed inci-
dent, namely, that Pe had requested of him to exe-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
193
cute a composition in his presence, and by what
means he had the luck to be able to acquit himself
with such decisive advantage.
" You are a most lucky dog," exclaimed Wang ;
" after such a trial, your marriage is determined
on, I take it for granted. Everything turns out to
the best advantage. Was it not an excellent thought
of mine, to keep the second piece ?"
"
I may well say," observed Tchang, " that
heaven has been auspicious to me this day. But I
feel a little alarmed lest the old fellow should sub-
ject me to another ordeal. Well, it will be either
life or death to me."
"1 think, that in what has taken place already,
you have a good security for the future," said
Wang.
" That is but a transitory security," replied
the other " and how shall I be able to keep the
thing up?"
" Very easily-see Sse Yeoupe, make a shew of
friendship towards him, keep him here, and if any
difficult task be proposed to you, get him to per-
form it in your stead; will not that be a relief
to you ?"
Tchang was quite pleased with the thought.
" That is an excellent idea," said he. "To-morrow
[ shall go and see him, and I shall prevail upon him
to come and live in my garden."
Early the next day he made haste to pay a visit
to Sse Yeoupe for he apprehended that this young
gentleman, disgusted with his failure, would take
his departure rather abruptly. But Sse Yeoupe
was still in bed when he called, and starting up in
surprise. when the announcement was made, he said,
194
JU-KIAO-LI:
"What, Tchang, is it you? Why, what brings you
out so early?"
" When I came home yesterday," replied Tchang,
" my head ached, and my limbs were wearied; and
I remember that I did not even keep you to take
anything with me. This was certainly a want of
politeness ; and I began to apprehend that you
would have stood upon ceremony with me, and
have imagined, that because I had made a little pro-
gress in this matrimonial affair, J would think no
longer of my friends. This is plainly and candidly
my only reason for coming, and I beg that you will
accept my apology."
"Feeling," said Sse Yeoupe, " that I am indebted
altogether to accident for the happiness of your ac-
quaintance, and yet remembering that I have re-
ceived from you testimonies of kindness which are
engraved upon my heart, it would ill become me to
stand upon ceremony with you."
6h If you are not angry with me, I shall be happy
to bring you to spend some days in my garden.
I
shall look upon your compliance as a proof of
friendship not to be forgotten."
Each circumstance, as it presented itself in suc-
cession before Sse Yeoupe's mind, only tended
more and more to add to its perplexity. He con-
fessed his inability to see clearly before him. How-
ever, he had not formed any resolution as to
leaving his present quarters, and the invitation
which he had just received suggested a project
to which his thoughts had immediate reference
when he addressed these words to his visitor:-
" You have already overpowered me with kind-
ness; you have acted towards me so handsomely in
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
195
every respect, that I could not hear the idea of
merely bidding you good morning, and going away.
But I am afraid that by residing in your garden I
shall become troublesome to you, and I do not wish
to do that."
If you entertain for me the feelings of a friend,
you must not talk in this way. Such language is
quite out of place."
Tchang then desired Siaohi, Sse Yeoupe's ser-
vant, to get ready his master's luggage, in order to
remove it."
"The fact is," said Sse Yeoupe, "accident
brought me here: I have but one horse, which is
below, and I am without any luggage."
"That is still better," said Tchang.
Sse Yeoupe soon finished his toilette, and took
leave of Tsingin his host. He then gave the reins of
his horse to Siaohi, and followed Tchang to his gar-
den,where he was to sojourn for a short time. Tchang
spared no pains in providing tea and every necessary
accommodation for his guest.
During the progress of an argument in which the
three young men were ardently engaged, a servant
came to announce the arrival of Pe's old porter.
Tchang could not repress his joy at this intelligence,
and ran out to meet the old man. "My master,"
said Toung, " presents his respects to you, and begs
to apologize for the unworthy reception which he
gave you yesterday."
" Why, he overpowered me with his kindness,"
replied Tchang; "insomuch that I was resolved to
call on him this day to express my gratitude to
him. But, my old friend, what is your business
now?"
196
JU-KIAO-LI:
" My master has a little boy who is now fifteen :
struck with your talents and vast acquirements, he
hopes that you will be so condescending as to
bestow instructions on him for about a year.
Here is the written agreement which he has pre-
pared, and here are also some presents which he
sends and he trusts that you will have no objection
to his proposal."
Tchang was so confounded at what he had heard,
that he was altogether unable to say whether he
would decline or accept the offer : but, taking
the agreement and the presents, he returned with
them to the pavilion, to have the opinion of Wang
and Sse Yeoupe as to what course he should take.
" What can be the meaning of this ?" said he to his
friends.
Nothing else," replied Sse Yeoupe, than that
he is impressed with your merits, and he desires
to have you near him."
"But between a preceptor and a son-in-law," ob-
served Tchang, there is a considerable difference.
Is there no old woman about the good man whose
influence might change the fortune against me ?"
"By no means," replied Wang laughing; " he
tenderly loves his daughter, and he is naturally
afraid that she would not be happy in his choice if
he concluded the affair without farther deliberation:
his object evidently is to become thoroughly ac-
quainted with you, and hence he has invited you to
reside with him as his guest. He wishes to ascer-
tain whether you are steady or otherwise; and
whether you are industrious or idly disposed.
You will now have an opportunity of insinuating
yourself into his good graces, and completing your
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
197
own purposes. It is a most fortunate proposal
why do you hesitate a moment what you will do?"
Tchang was quite pleased with his friend's advice,
and returned without delay to the porter. If it
had been any other person in the world," said he,
"I should scruple to go and live in his house.
But to your master I find it impossible to deny
any sacrifice: I have no alternative but to accept
his proposal. One thing, my dear Toung, I beg of
you to mention to him; and that is, that I shall
want to have a study in some retired, quiet spot,
where no one can disturb me, and where I can de-
vote myself to books without fear of interruption."
" That can be easily arranged," replied Toung,
who then took his leave, and returned to Kinchi.
The satisfaction with which Pe had heard of
Tchang's compliance was considerably enhanced,
when he understood that the young man had wished
to stipulate for a quiet, retired place, to study in.
He instantly gave directions for the preparation
and complete fitting up of a convenient place be-
hind the garden ; and after having selected a lucky
day, he sent for Tchang to come and take up his
residence in his house.
Scarcely had the latter been installed in his new
situation, than he began to affect the man of im-
portance, and to give himself all the airs of an
ardent student. Sitting or standing; he was never
without a book in his hand : and when anybody
approached, he began to murmur some indistinct
words, like a person in the act of getting off by
heart. He was quite delighted at finding in Ying-
ling a pupil quite worthy of his master. A perfect
sympathy of disposition subsisted between them.
198
JU-KIAO-LI:
There were two or three persons in the house who
might have been able to see into his character: for
Tchang was not like the ordinary race of tutors-he
had not the least taste for books; but he was ac-
quainted with the art of blinding a prying eye, and
silencing a busy tongue, with money. In addition to
this, Tchang was pleasant and affable he had a
civil word for everybody; and people of almostevery
grade in the house were fond of occasionally chat-
ting with him : hence it was that when unfortu-
nately he left anywhere the print of the cloven foot,
every person was anxious to do all they could to
conceal it.
It happened that a cluster of red-leaved pear-
trees, whose branches drooped over the pavilion of
rural dreams, was once covered with a profusion of
blossoms, which attracted the admiration of Pe and
his daughter. "To-morrow," said the father, I
shall have a repast in this place, to which Tchang
shall be invited, to enjoy the sight of these pear-
trees. I shall take an opportunity of prevailing on
him to compose a song of various metre upon them,
to be set to music. This will answer the double
object of putting his talent to a farther test, and of
furnishing us with agreeable entertainment."
Scarcely had Pe pronounced his intention, when
a secret messenger conveyed its purport to Tchang,
who felt not a little alarmed at the communication.
The only course he had was, to despatch a note with
the rapidity of lightning to Sse Yeoupe, begging of
him to come and see him.
Sse Yeoupe happened at the moment to be quite
alone, and experiencing the irksomeness of solitude:
he was anxious to find out what was going on, but
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
199
he knew not where to inquire. Tchang's invitation
was therefore precisely what he wanted. The day
was too far advanced to allow him to go imme-
diately, and he was therefore under the necessity of
stating, in a note to Tchang, that he should be happy
to wait on him at an early hour the next morning.
Tchang's mind was on the rack during the night,
lest some accident might prevent Sse Yeoupe from
keeping his appointment ; and he did not close an
eye. As soon as morning appeared, he despatched
a messenger to Sse Yeoupe to remind him of his
promise: and he himself stood at the garden door
to watch the approach of his friend.
Luckily for him, Sse Yeoupe had an object of his
own in view, which he had too much at heart to re-
quire any importunity to fulfil his engagement with
Tchang. He had, in fact, already set out for Kin-
chi. The moment Tchang descried him at a dis-
tance, he ran towards him with as much satisfaction
depicted on his countenance, as if heaven itself had
come to his assistance. He first saluted Sse Yeoupe,
and then taking him by the hand, led him into the
study. " Ever since I have been shut up in this
place, my dear friend," said Tchang, scarcely a
quarter of an hour has passed without my thinking
of you."
It has been exactly my case with respect to
you," replied Sse Yeoupe ; " I have been more
than once tempted to pay you a visit here; but I
was afraid that it would not be easy to get in."
"I am perfect master here: what difficulty had
you?'
Whilst they were thus conversing, Yingling came
in to take his lesson. "I have a friend with me,"
200
JU-KIAO-LI:
said Tchang to the boy; " you may have a holi-
day." Yingling bounded off with joy at the news,
and Tchang and Sse Yeoupe resumed the conver-
sation. " It is a long time since we saw each
other," observed the tutor. "I suppose since you
went to my garden you have composed a great
number of verses ?"
" None, I assure you," returned Sse Yeoupe ;
" I feel too lonely for composing verses. But you
who are in the neighbourhood of such skilful poets,
have doubtless, done something in that way."
" I am occupied every day with this pupil of
mine," said Tchang ; "how is it possible for me
to devote any time to such an employment But it
so happened that yesterday, as I was walking
towards the pavilion, I was struck with the appear-
ance of a pear-tree, the red blossoms of which were
in full bloom. I was tempted to make them the
subject of some verses; but I thought that it
would be better, at last, merely to write a little
song upon them. I have been ever since thinking
of the subject, but I have committed nothing yet
to paper."
" Do not suppose that a good song is so very
easy a matter to compose. In ordinary verses
there are only two sounds used, the even and
uneven; but in a song we must have four, the even,
the increased, the long, and the reflective: then
you are to distinguish between the true and the
doubtful consonants according to the intonations
that belong to the masculine and feminine genders.
If a single syllable be wanted, or an improper ac-
cent interposed, there will be a disagreement with
the notes of the air, and you expose yourself to the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
201
ridicule of connoisseurs. Hence compositions of
this sort are called premeditated pieces, because
they cannot be written expeditiously."
" In that case," said Tchang, " I shall give up
attempting a song, for I do not want that people
should laugh at me. But you, my friend, who
need not care about lavishing the gold and jasper
of your fancy, write one, I entreat of you : I shall
take all due pains to mark the consonants and
accents with the greatest accuracy. Will you have
the goodness, my dear friend, to give me a lesson?"
.6 As for verses and songs, they are the pastime
of literary men when taking tea or drinking to-
gether :-wl should I not be inclined to gratify
you ? But where is the red-blossomed |pear-tree?
If you can let me just glance at it, that will be
enough to inspire me."
" There is a cluster of those trees about the
pavilion of rural dreams," said Tchang. 'To see
them, we have only to ascend the gallery of flowers
and thence we shall be able to have the full com-
mand of them."
The young men then, taking each other's hand,
crossed the garden, and ascended the gallery of flow-
ers, whence they had a view of the red-blossomed
pear-tree, the foliage of which hung over the wall.
The blossoms were all blown, and appeared as if
they had been stained with blood, so deep and at
the same time so beautiful was their hue.
What delicious blossoms!" exclaimed Sse Yeoupe
in a transport of admiration. " These are truly
worth celebrating but it is a pity that we should be
separated from them by this wall : we cannot have
the full command of them. Could we not contrive
202
JU-KIAO-LI:
to enter the pavilion for the purpose of seeing them
to greater advantage ? It would be infinitely more
agreeable."
"We must not go there," said Tchang. "This
pavilion is the private study of Mr Pe; and it has a
communication with the apartment where his
daughter works her embroidery. You could not ex-
pect that he would suffer strangers to walk there."
"Oh, if this place communicate with the apart-
ment of the young lady of the house, it is perfectly
plain," said Sse Yeoupe, "that we must not pre-
sume to go there."
The two friends did not remain long in the gal-
lery of flowers, but they returned to Tchang's
study. The latter had only one object in view, and
that was to prevail on Sse Yeoupe to write a song.
He was filled with apprehensions lest, in the first
place, his friend should not have sufficient time to
write the verses; or, in the next place, lest he him-
self should not have time enough to get them by heart.
He therefore pressed Sse Yeoupe to proceed with
the composition, who, to say the truth, was so filled
with the imagination of Miss Pe, that he wanted no
stimulus to urge him to the task. He took a pen,
and yielding to the inspiration of the moment,
poured forth his thoughts in harmonious numbers.
We must leave for a distinct history an account
of the sly and cautious opening of her perfumed
apartment by the young beauty, as well as the
power of remorse over the detested pretender.
The following chapter will resolve the problem
whether or not Sse Yeoupe composed the song
which was expected of him.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
203
CHAPTER IX.
THE PLUM IS REMOVED, AND A PEACH IS SOUGHT
FOR IN THE GALLERY OF FLOWERS.
" The heart of man, cold or fervent, hardened or soft, still preserves,
some way or other, a sense of barmony. One time it is the snatch of
an old drinking song, at another, it is the vision of a lover, that thrills
us. Who is it that would deliberately tarnish the parity of the alabas-
ter, or abandon a pearl upon the way ? The timid dove will die strug-
gling to protect her nest. But the chosen subject of commemoration.
for embroidery, is a pair of faithful birds."
SSE Yeoupe, being thus importuned by Tchang, and
animated at the same time by his own conceptions,
yielded, as we have related, to the united impulse,
and threw off a succession of stanzas. It was per-
fectly wonderful to see with what rapidity the ink
was transferred from the marble to the paper. One
quarter of an hour was quite sufficient to enable him
to finish his song. "I am sorry," said he, as he
handed the manuscript to Tchang, "to have so
badly answered your expectations : do not laugh at
me, my friend."
Tchang took the verses, and read them with the
utmost attention, as follows:-
SONG.
ON THE RED BLOSSOMED PEAR-TREE.
(An Evening Walk.)
You seek the shade: what is sweeter than a fine night,
Abroad in the moonlight, with a beloved object be-
side you ?
Who would have thought the Spring was so prodigal
204
JU-KIAO-LI:
He clothes the branches of trees in rubies,
Which glitter on all sides like glowing lamps.
Is this an almond or a peach tree ?
To my mind it bears the sanguine traces of two beings
who died thinking of each other.
THE INEBRIETY PRODUCED BY THE EAST WIND.
Those sweet purple tints penetrate the hoar frost which
crowns the grove.
The half of these petals are carried away by the current,
whose surface they make red.
Raising aloft their crimson heads, these flowers clothe
the branches which issue from a bed of snow.
A damsel, it is said, at the foot of this gallery,
Gathers together countless garments of silk.
Fleecy clouds, and condensed mists,
Lend their lively hues to the blossoms,
And the cuckoo's voice is heard from amongst its
branches.
THE YOUNG BEAUTY.
What is it that my soul seeks here, darkened as it has
been so long by the clouds of melancholy ?
With transport does it court the Spring on two beautiful
cheeks.
Amidst this shower of roses, this sweet smelling bed of
snow,
May the drone and the busy butterfly never come to
disturb our calm !
THE MOON ABOVE THE JAPANESE PEAR-TREE.
Thou graceful union of various hues,
It is Spring that has modified thy soft proportions!
Whence are those delicious perfumes
Which thy blossoms exhale from grove and by foun-
tain ?
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
205
Whence those beauties which bear away every thought
Take pity then on thy poet,
Oh thou who can'st fill his heart with never dying gra-
titude !
THE FIVE OFFERINGS.
These white petals and red filaments are like brother and
sister.
Their thick tufts, their glowing hues,
The soft down which covers them,
Enchant the eye.
How must the wandering visitor feel delighted at the
prospect of thy beauties!
Charms that steal away our senses !
Sweets that overcome the heart!
Fear ye the nuptial breeze ?
When the sun is shaded with yellow mists,
And the moon is wont to shine o'er thee,
Then 1 shall see the beloved object near thee
Spread o'er thy head the transparent veil.
THE HEART OF JASPER.
1 love to think o'er thy splendid traits,
Thou emblem of unsullied purity !
I know what merit is necessary to him that would pre-
tend to such charms ;
But trust not to the prince of the East, whose beams
would parch up thy sweets.
RED BLOSSOMS ON THE SURFACE OF THE WATER.
Beauties that announce the death of Spring !
The god of flowers seizes you with his fingers.
The fresh breeze alone is acceptable to you.
I who am guided by sincere affection,
Would keep you in blossom the whole year round.
But your large leaves, that droop towards the ground,
Represent to my sight a nuptial robe, Yelo !
206
JU-KIAO-LI:
CHORUS.
Shall we rejoice at the sight of this beauty which re-
pairs itself?
Here are grief and repentance in its train.
Surely the twelve gates of the year will open other
pleasures to us.
Strange, that they should leave us but a brief joy.
FINAL COUPLET.
We see and feel the beauties of those boughs,
And poetry gives its charm to their attractions.
But is it possible adequately to celebrate
The red-blossomed pear-tree?
When Tchang had read the song, he could not
avoid expressing the utmost satisfaction. " You
are," said he, " a genuine divine poet, and you are
entitled to my respect and homage."
"Asong thus hastily composed," said Sse Yeoupe,
"cannot possibly merit your eulogies."
Tchang still held the manuscript in his hand, and
occasionally read or recited it. " From the way in
which he seems pleased with it," said Sse Yeoupe
to himself, "one would imagine that he wished to
get it off." Then he addressed Tchang. "Can
such a trifle engage you so? You promised that
you would give an imitation ; will you not let me
see how you get on ?"
"When I compose," replied Tchang, "I must
take a great deal of time to reflect and to choose my
words. I cannot succeed without such a process.
1 do not boast the same facility as yourself; only
give me the indulgence of one sleepless night, and
then we may consult together on the attempt which
I shall have made."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
207
Again Tchang gave a glance at the song, and
then he rolled it up and put it into his sleeve.
Whilst the two friends were thus conversing to-
gether, a servant came to inform Tchang that his
master wanted to speak with him in the pavilion of
rural dreams.
I have a visitor with me," replied Tchang I
cannot go at this moment."
"It is your host that invites you," said Sse Yeoupe,
proposing to take leave.
Tchang would have willingly allowed him to de-
part, but he dreaded that some subject would be
proposed with respect to which he would require
assistance; he therefore decided upon detaining Sse
Yeoupe. " My brother," said he, "where is the ne-
cessity for your retiring? Stay where you are for a
few minutes; I shall just see my host, and then return
to you. This place is quiet and retired, nobody will
disturb you. You can walk about here at your ease."
Sse Yeoupe's primary object had been to learn
somenews; and seeing that Tchang wished to keep
him, he agreed to remain.
" I feel that I have a thousand apologies to make
to you," said Tchang upon which he left his friend,
and followed the servant to the pavilion of rural
dreams. When he had ascended, Pe received him
with kindness. "Several days have passed since we
have been with each other," said he. "I am de-
lighted to see you at last. I was this morning struck
with the beauty of these flowers, and I have taken
the liberty of inviting you here to enjoy them for a
few moments."
" I have been so occupied," replied Tchang,
with the education of your son, that I never
208
JU-KIAO-LI:
imagined that spring had already matured such
beautiful flowers. I have to thank your excellency
for the opportunity of enjoying such an exquisite
spectacle. Nothing surely can be more delight-
ful."
'Those," observed Pe, "who give themselves up
to study, should certainly be guarded against ex-
cessive application. The mind is liable to be at
last worn out. When flowers present themselves
of a morning, or the moon at night, we should allow
ourselves to indulge in the contemplation of those
beautiful objects."
He then directed the servants to spread a repast
beneath the branches of a pear-tree, that Tchang
and himself might enjoy the pleasures of drinking
and contemplating the blossoms at the same time.
After they had taken a few cups, Pe observed to his
guest, 'Doubtless, since you came here to reside,
you have given birth to some exquisite com-
positions. Will you do me the favour to shew me
one or two?"
" Since I was received into your house," replied
Tchang, "I took advantage of the undisturbed
quiet of this retreat, to court a more intimate
familiarity with our ancient authors. 1 have not
been able to write a line of poetry in the time."
": Well, well," said Pe, embosomed as we are amid
these blossoms, we should not let slip the present
occasion."
Tchang was delighted to perceive, that the sub-
ject for which he had anticipated preparation, was
that one which would in reality be proposed to him:
and as he had his composition in his sleeve, he as-
sumed a corresponding degree of confidence and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
209
&
ease. As your excellency," said he, " does not
disdain to notice what is so humble and unworthy, I
am perfectly ready to afford you fresh materials
for mirth."
" I dare say that so skilful a poet as yourself
can compose without difficulty some charming
songs. A few days ago a relation of mine, a gen-
tleman of the name of Gou, sent me a couple of
young singers. Their voices are agreeable enough,
but the words are old, and I find them monotonous.
If you be in the vein at present, you can take this
red-blossomed pear-tree for your subject, and com-
pose a song upon it. I will teach it to my singers,
and it will be jasper and pearl to our ears. Will you
have the kindness to begin ?"
Tchang was infinitely pleased at the proposal,
and gladly replied, "That since his kind friend had
ordered, he could not hesitate to comply; but he
feared that his song would not answer the purpose
he proposed to make it."
Pe now ordered the servants to get pen and ink,
and to fill a cup of wine for Mr Tchang. The latter
drank it; and taking up the pen, he threw up his
head in the attitude of one that was fixed in
thought. He transcribed in a very short time the
three or four couplets of the first part; but when
he came to the concluding ones, he found that he
had altogether forgotten them. Here he laboured
to recall them; but he could not succeed. Upon
some pretext or another, he left the table, and re-
tiring behind an arbour, he secretly drew forth the
manuscript from his sleeve, and perused it several
times, to impress its contents with more certainty
on his mind. He returned as quickly as possible
210
JU-KIAO-LI:
to the seat he had left; and as soon as he finished
the transcript he handed it to Pe.
The latter considered the piece for a short time,
and then broke out with enthusiasm in these terms
" This is an exquisite song indeed! It has depth
and great delicacy of expression. Your talent, sir,
was formed for the academy; and some day or other
you will outstrip me in fortune and honours."
"My dear sir," replied Tchang, "what com-
parison can there be between a poor student like
myself, who am but as the stubble of the field,
with the brilliant cloud that floats in the firmament?
Your praises fill me with confusion."
The party continued conversing in this manner
and drinking together. It deserves to be mentioned
that Houngiu, finding it impossible to reconcile
herself to the writing of the two pieces on the Spring
Willows which had been sent to her, took some
flower-paper, and made a careful transcript of them
in her own hand in the most elegant characters
possible. This copy she kept in an embroidered
silk bag, and carried it with her to read night
and morning. She could not avoid dwelling on the
idea, that a poet of such superior talent as the com-
poser must be, would crown all her hopes and
wishes : and yet she felt that something would un-
doubtedly be wanting to her happiness, when she
understood that this young man, who appeared to
be endowed with such distinguished talent, was
destitute of the advantages of person. The latter
thought produced the deepest uneasiness in her
mind: she became more dejected every day, un-
conscious of the cause of her melancholy.
On the day to which we have already drawn the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
211
reader's attention, having finished her toilet, Houn-
giu gave herself up to reflection. Yansou tells
me," said she, "that this young man is so plain
but where there is so much genius, there surely
must be something pleasing even in his plainness.
I am glad that Yansou is now away : I shall go se-
cretly, and have an opportunity of judging for my-
self of his appearance. If he be this deformed
work of nature, I am determined to break off at
once. The result of this secret visit shall fix all
my wavering."
And proceeding without a moment's delay to
carry her project into execution, she gently opened
the western side-door, and descended, unseen, into
the garden. As she approached the gallery of
flowers, she heard some one cough within. She
then hid herself in a neighbouring bower, whence
she was enabled to have a full view of the hand-
some student who was then pensively walking up
and down the gallery. He had the
Carriage of a student*:
The delicacy of youth:
The calm air of autumn:
A garment like the mists of spring
The glow of a precious stone:
Spring breathed from his cheek:
And his countenance bore the stamp of a poet.
His eye shone with love:
His limbs were well proportioned
If you ask what he was like,
It was some god issuing from the lotus.
When she saw this young man, whom she mistook
for Tchang, Houngiu could not resist an exclama-
212
JU-KIAO-LI:
tion of delight: " What a fine face! How could
Yansou think of telling me that he wanted a pre-
possessing appearance?" She little thought that the
person who stood before her was really Sse Yeoupe,
who had just come from the study, where he was
left to take a walk in the gallery. After she had
secretly viewed the young man for some time longer,
Houngiu, fearing that any one might discover her,
slided from her place of concealment, and gained
the door by which she had entered the garden.
Yansou was just coming to meet her at the mo-
ment. "My lady," said the girl, "dinner is ready:
where have you been walking alone? I have been
looking for you everywhere, and could not find
you."
Houngiu, a little displeased, made no reply.
" Why is my dear young lady angry?" said
Yansou.
Wicked girl!" exclaimed Houngiu, " what
have I done that thou shouldst presume to deceive
me in this manner? I was very near being the
victim of your falsehoods all my life."
" What can all this be ?" said Yansou. "I have
been attached to you from my childhood: you have
never found me false to you. When did I deceive
you?"
"If you have not deceived me, tell me what it is
you find to complain of in the person of Master
Tchang, my suitor?"
"And is it for this you talk to me?" said Yansou.
" Well, you may not only scold me, but you may
kill me if you please yet.I never will say, contrary
to my opinion, that he is a good-looking man."
" Ungrateful creature that you are! What fables
OR. THE TWO COUSINS.
213
are those you have been telling me? I have seen the
gentleman with my own eyes."
" What ! you have seen him, have you? replied
Yansou.
"Yes, I have and his person is agreeable be-
yond description: there is not amongst the learned
class in the empire any one like him. What could
be your motive for lessening him in this manner?"
" Well, this is the most wonderful thing I ever
heard in my life," said Yansou. " You used, my
dear lady, to look up so very high : how is it that
you can let yourself down so low now? Take care
that you are not deceived by this suitor of your's,
and that you do not mistake a Lieou for a Youan."
Who else than he could have entered the gar-
den from the back, near the gallery of flowers?"
" 1 cannot imagine," replied Yansou; " but
perhaps there is a second young man there: wait
until I have seen him myself." And without a
moment's delay she tripped into the garden.
Sse Yeoupe had just descended from the gallery,
and was walking amongst the flowers. Yansou, not
finding any person in the gallery, began to look
about. Sse Yeoupe perceived her suddenly; and
getting into an arbour, he had an opportunity of
observing her unperceived.
Her shoulders were like the pear-tree's branches,
She was tall as the willow.
Hers were the charms of grace and gaiety,
And not the proud bearing of haughty beauty.
Sse Yeoupe examined her for some time; and
fearing that, if he shewed himself abruptly, she
might run away, he allowed her to descend from
the gallery; and coming up close behind her, he
214
JU-KIAO-LI:
whispered, " My pretty maid, for whom are you
looking so anxiously?"
Yansou immediately turned her head, and seeing
Sse Yeoupe, a young student then in the flower of
his age, she felt an emotion of pleasure mingled
with some apprehension. "Who are you?" said
she. "And why do you hide yourself in this place?"
" I am that Sse Yeoupe, whose verses on the
Spring Willows have been so unsuccessful, and
whom fate has conducted hither : take pity on me,
pretty maid !"
"To judge by your appearance, sir, you are not
destitute of talent : how is it that you have been
neglected?"
'My poor undeserving verses were not worthy
of pleasing your young mistress; but my wonder is
that, gifted as she appears to be with such talents
and discrimination, she should fix her choice on a
person who is only worthy to be laughed at."
" You must not speak so slightingly, sir," said
Yansou, " of Mr Tchang : it is true he cannot bear
any comparison with you in personal appearance;
but there is a grace and an elegance in his com-
position, which render him truly agreeable. My
mistress looks rather to merit than person, and
hence she has given him a preference."
Nay," replied Sse Yeoupe, "if she had even
preferred him on the score of person, I should not
be so much surprised ; but that she should have
been taken with his verses, is indeed an extraordi-
nary thing."
"I have been informed that his verses are re-
markably beautiful: tastes differ, no doubt."
" What a victim have I been all my life," ex-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
215
claimed Sse Yeoupe, sighing, to a fatal predilec-
tion for beauty and talent! How many storms and
tempests have I buffetted ! I presumed to raise my
eyes to a young beauty, gifted with every sort of
talent and charm; I was transported with the hope
that she was still free : and yet what consideration
has she for real merit? An unhappy pre-engage-
ment compels her to despise me, to reject my ardent
love! Well, well," said he, profoundly sighing,
"poor devoted young man-thy lot is to be un-
happy, and there is no use in complaint."
Yansou was considerably affected when she heard
Sse Yeoupe giving vent to these expressions of grief
and despair, and the tears almost stood in her eyes.
"I have listened to your complaints," said she
soothingly, "and you seem to attach blame to my
young mistress for having entertained so bad an
opinion of your verses. I know, however, that she
is so very partial to talent, that in discovering it
she has the penetration of a rhinosceros's eyes.
But since you object to her decision, what do you
think if you copy your first verses again? I shall
take them to my young mistress to reconsider them;
and who knows but the pearl which she has cast
away at first, may be found acceptable on a second
view?"
Sse Yeoupe expressed the warmest gratitude for
this offer. "Such a favour, my charming maid,"
said he, death itself shall not efface from my
memory."
"Well then, there is no time to be lost-write
the copy, and I shall take it at once."
Sse Yeoupe ran to the study, wrote out the two
pieces on some flower-paper, and folding them into
216
JU-KIAO-LI :
the form of a square packet, came back with them
to Yansou. "There," said he; " be so good as to
bear this to your mistress : beg of her to read it
with as much attention as she can, and at least not
to entertain any bad opinion of Sse Yeoupe."
"I shall comply with your directions exactly,"
replied Yansou.
Sse Yeoupe was about to say, something further to
her, when they suddenly heard the voice of Tchang,
who had just parted from Pe, and who, in approach-
ing the place where they then stood, was heard cry-
ing out, "Liansian, my friend, where are you ?"
Yansou now made the best of her way behind the
gallery to the door of the apartment by which she
had entered. Sse Yeoupe went forward to meet
Tchang. "Here! I am walking here," said he.
"I beg your pardon, my friend, for having been
so long away."
It could not be helped," rejoined Sse Yeoupe.
The old gentleman wanted to have some farther
conversation with me, but I mentioned that you were
waiting for me, and he proposed that you should
come and join us. But, as the repast was over, I
did not think that it would be quite polite to do so:
he then allowed me to retire, and bring the wine-
chest with me to entertain ourselves.
Tchang took Sse Yeoupe by the hand, and led
him to the study, where they remained together
drinking and conversing until the sun began to
grow pale in the western horizon. Tchang having
called to a servant to accompany Sse Yeoupe, the
latter took his leave and retired.
Whilst these occurrences were taking place,
Yansou and her mistress were not unoccupied.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
217
The servant baving, as we stated, taken the packet
from Sse Yeoupe, returned running to her mistress,
and with a laugh of triumph said to her, " So I
knew, Miss, that you were mistaken."
" How mistaken?'
"
Undoubtedly," replied Yansou. " If master
Tchang was as handsome as this gentleman, you
would not have been mistaken."
And if it be not Tchang, who can it be ?"
" A friend of Mr Tchang's, a Mr Sse," replied
Yansou.
And what business has he here ?"
" He says that he came for the verses on the
Spring Willows ; and that not having been able to
gain your approbation, he is chained to the place
by a sort of fatality."
At these words the willow-leaved brows of Houn-
giu were contracted, and the blossom on her cheek
assumed the hue of autumn. She breathed an
involuntary sigh. " Alas, how unfortunate," said
she, "that Tchang with so much mind should be
so devoid of personal recommendations, and that
this other youth should unite with so prepossessing
an appearance, so small a portion of talent! What
a severe dispensation is mine!"
" To tell you the truth, my dear young lady,
I do not know that this other young gentleman is
so unworthy of you, because forsooth he cannot
write these little-bits of rhymes!"
"I must confess, Yansou, that I have been a little
taken with those advantages of person with which
nature has endowed him. But what a pity that
he should be the sort of man he is ! Why does he
not devote himself to study ?"
218
JU-KIAO-LI:
" That is exactly what I said myself," replied
Yansou. " But he seems to think that his verses
are not so bad : on the contrary, he says you have
very unjustly condemned them."
" Both my father and myself hold talent in as
much veneration as we do our very existence : and
had we detected even a single good expression in
his verses, we should have readily remarked and
admired it. How could we have been unjust in
our opinions then ?"
" I certainly should not have supposed so," said
Yansou ; " but I observed the elegance of his
manner, his genteel air, and his interesting figure :
every word he uttered made an impression on my
mind : and I own I concluded that he must be a
sensible and intelligent gentleman. I therefore
told him to copy out his first verses, and that I
should present them to you again. It is really a
pity for you to lose such a fine gentleman as this."
She then took the packet from her sleeve, and
handed it to her mistress.
How is this ?" cried Houngiu, casting her eyes
on the manuscript. Why, they are word for word
Tchang's verses !"
Yansou, not less surprised than her mistress, said-
" If that be the case, he has certainly stolen them."
Houngiu read them again and again. "I have a
strong suspicion," said she, after considering them
attentively, "that it is Mr Tchang who has stolen
them from this youth."
What makes you think that?" asked Yansou.
Mr Tchang, on the recommendation of these
two compositions, has been able to establish him-
self here in the capacity of our guest: every one
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
219
knows that; this young man is his friend, and conse-
quently is aware of the circumstance. Now would
it not at once be exposing himself to immediate and
unavoidable disgrace, if he were to copy Tchang's
verses and endeavour to pass them here for his
own? Then Tchang's writing is the very worst
and most vulgar that can be whilst that of the
other young man, though carelessly and rapidly
executed, reminds one of the delicate touches of
the flying dragon. Is it not perfectly clear there-
fore that Tchang must be the thief on this occasion?"
" Very likely indeed, ma'am; why not go at
once to your father, make him have an explanation
with Mr Tehang, and send him away, that you may
marry this young man without delay. La! ma'am,
when you are man and wife, what a very fine, hand-
some couple you will make, to be sure !"
" That is all very well in imagination," said
Houngiu, despondingly; "but how am I to mention
such a thing to my father ?"
" What is to hinder you ?"
" These two pieces have been communicated to
me through a private channel. If I shew them to
my father, and if he asks me how I came by them,
what am I to say? Besides, we have no very certain
proof of this young man's talent; and should we
hold him up as a person of genius, my father
doubtless would insist upon examining him: then
if he was found to fail, it is plain that our opinions
must be said to differ. How many suspicions, in
that fase, may not arise in my father's mind ?"
At this moment a servant entered the apartment
and delivered a paper to Miss Pe, saying that her
master had sent her with some verses which had
220
JU-KIAO-LI:
that moment been composed by Mr Tchang, in his
presence, in the pavilion of rural dreams.
Houngiu opened the paper, and saw that it was a
song on the red-blossomed pear-trees. She read it
with the greatest pleasure and admiration. The
verses on the Spring Willows," said she to herself,
" were said to have been stolen from their real
author : now here is a song composed at the mo-
ment upon a subject which was suddenly proposed.
Could this have been robbed likewise?"
My dear young lady," said Yansou, interrupting
her reflections, " do not abandon your first im-
pressions; do not, I beseech you, give up this fine
young man."
"You little know the struggle in my heart at
this moment. Should the mind of this young man
not correspond with his appearance, and should I
take him for my husband, I shall not only frustrate
all the pains which my father has so long been
taking to chose a worthy son-in-law, but I myself,
to whose existence the pleasures of poetry are so
necessary, I shall not be able to disclose to my
husband all my secret thoughts. No-I must not
unthinkingly give him encouragement."
"To take his own word for it," observed Yansou,
he does not want talent and information: he quite
laughs at Mr Tchang."
" Upon any other occasion I should know how
to act; but in an affair of this importance, which
concerns my whole life, I must not be precipitate
or heedless. In short, unless 1 put him to the
proof myself, my mind will never be easy."
That is not at all difficult," said Yansou.
I
see that this young man has conceived for you
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
221
a violent affection. He vows that he thinks of
nothing but you. He is sure to return here, and
then it will be easy for you to propose some difficult
subject to him. He shall be obliged to compose
on the spot, and then we shall learn whether or not
he possesses talent."
That is quite practicable," said Houngiu. "But
be secret-see that no one observes you: all will
then go'on well."
" No doubt it will, my dear young lady." And
the result of this deliberation appeared to communi-
cate the greatest satisfaction to both.
Scarcely a morning or evening now passed
without Yansou being sent to see if Sse Yeoupe
yet appeared. Twice or thrice she met him, but
either Tchang or young Yingling accompanied
him : under such circumstances she could do no
more than glance at him from a distance, and then
hide herself. She had not an opportunity of speak-
ing to him for a considerable time.
One day, when Pe was at home, the news came
to him that Yang, the inspector-general, who had
been promoted to the rank of governor of the pro-
vince of Tchekiang, was then on his way to Kin-
ling, and that being so near, he could not avoid
turning out of his way, to have the pleasure of
visiting Pe. He had sent a messenger to announce
his approach, and was now stated to be not far off.
This piece of intelligence had no other effect upon
Pe, than to provoke his laughter. "Why," said
he, "from this to Kinling is at least sixty or
seventy miles; and this good gentleman must come
thus far out of his way to see me Perhaps he
wants to make up for his former misconduct. If
222
JU-KIAO-LI:
I were now to give him a cold reception, it would
be only putting myself on a level with his contempt-
ible mind."
Pe then ordered the study to be got ready with-
out delay for his expected guest, and commanded a
magnificent entertainment to be provided against
his arrival. He sent for a company of players; and
in order to do Yang still further honour, he was
about to go and invite some of the neighbouring
magistrates to meet him ; but remembering that
they were of an inferior rank, and that he was not
on terms of intimacy with them, he resolved to dis-
pense with their company, and to limit his invita-
tations to Tchangfanjou alone, whose rank of bache-
lor fully entitled him to that honour, The neces-
sary preparations having been completed, governor
Yang arrived early in the afternoon. The custo-
mary ceremonies were observed, and the two old
men sat conversing together for some time. A feast
was served up in the grand parlour: a play was per-
formed ; and Pe did everything in his power to
entertain and amuse his guests, Yang and Tchang-
fanjou.
In the mean time, Sse Yeoupe, who had heard of
this interruption to the usual course of affairs in
the family of Pe, came secretly to wander about
in the garden. The porter of the back entrance,
who saw Sse Yeoupe go and come so frequently,
never thought of disturbing him; and on this day,
when the confusion in which the family were in-
volved, might have justified his interference, he left
Sse Yeoupe at full liberty to enter the garden as
usual. The latter, encouraged by this freedom,
advanced as far as the gallery. He ascended the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
223
steps, and inquisitively threw his eyes around.
Now it so happened that Yansou was prompted to
go to the very same spot exactly in time to en-
counter Sse Yeoupe, who, when he saw the servant,
could scarcely repress his joy. "Since the happy
moment that you were good enough to do me so
great an act of kindness," said he to her, "I have
scarcely taken my eyes off this place; but I could
get no opportunity of seeing you. I can neither eat
nor sleep; my heart is ready to break. I learned
that your master had company to-day in the front
of the house, and I came here in the hope of being
so fortunate as to meet you. I shall never forget
your kindness in thus keeping to your promise.
But tell me about these horrible verses the other
day: has your young lady condescended to look
at them?"
"She has seen them but, sir, your two com-
positions, and those of Mr Tchang, are literally the
same. When my mistress read them, she was not
a little astonished, and she would be glad of an
explanation from you."
" Is it possible ?" cried Sse Yeoupe, quite con-
founded. " You astonish me indeed. My dear
girl, you must go at once to your mistress, and tell
her, that I am the real author of these verses that
Tchang has stolen them from me; and that I am
incapable of such a fraud."
" Which are we to believe, sir? How can we
tell which of you speak the truth ?"
" Very easily, my good girl. If those verses were
written by Tchang, what a dolt must I be, after they
have been conned over by your master and mistress,
224
JU-KIAO-L1:
to steal them for the purpose of serving them up a
second time to the same parties !'
" So my mistress says," quickly rejoined Yan-
sou ; " but there is a song on the red-blossomed
pear-trees, which has been suddenly composed in
my master's presence; is that by the same hand ?
Is that one of your performances which has been
stolen too ?"
Sse Yeoupe burst out laughing. "This song on
the pear-trees, I pronounce to be another robbery
on me likewise."
"But how can that be ?" asked the incredulous
servant. "For it was whilst they were sitting to-
gether in the pavilion, that my master started the
subject. Those trees are seldom to be met with ;
how should you have known of them before, and
been able to compose a song upon them ?"
" There is nothing in this affair of the song that
I cannot explain. The day I met you, Tchang had
sent for me at an early hour; he brought me into
the gallery, shewed me those trees, and importuned
me to compose. I, who was full of love for your
mistress, became inspired at the sight of such a
beautiful object, and hastily composed the piece.
Who could have dreamed that I was then weav-
ing his wedding garment for Mr Tchang? Here
is a monstrous business ! But, my good girl,
if you do not choose to credit me, Tchangfanjou is
not yet dead: to-morrow morning, at furthest, I
shall challenge him face to face; and then it shall
be made manifest to all where the truth and false-
hood exist."
" Well, this is a very mysterious business ! How
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
225
shall my master and mistress be able to clear it up,
I should like to know? It is possible that but for
this explanation they would have fallen into the net
of a deceiver. Do not give yourself up to grief
good sir: I shall communicate a full history of the
affair to my mistress; and I do not doubt but that
she will have as much reason to esteem you for
your good qualities, as she is prepossessed in
favour of your person."
" Thou art indeed my only hope !" said Sse
Yeoupe ardently ; "and you have a claim to my
eternal gratitude."
Yansou ran to her mistress, and after a short
interval returned. "My young lady," said she to
Sse Yeoupe, "bids me say that the conduct of Mr
Tchang is certainly very suspicious; but she says
that your declarations are not altogether satisfac-
tory. However, not to waste time, since you pos-
sess such a fund of genuine talent, here is a sub-
ject upon which she wishes you to write. Are you
in the mood to submit to this trial in my pre-
sence?"
Sse Yeoupe was transported with joy, and in a
tone of eagerness replied-" If your mistress will
condescend to confer so great an honour on me as
to put me to the proof in this way, it will be to me
happiness enough for a period of three lives. Give
me the subject, my good girl, and then watch till I
finish the piece."
" You need not be so very merry, good sir the
subject you will find is not so easy as you may
imagine."
She then took out of her sleeve a sheet of flower
226
JU-KIAO-LI :
paper, and a speckled-handled pen, which she
gave to Sse Yeoupe. She also presented him with
an antique standish, a vessel of water, and a stick
of ink which she laid upon a large slab. My
mistress," said Yansou, "tells me, that the old
poets reached the seven syllabic verse without any
difficulty. Now, as you think SO highly of your
powers, you will I dare say spare no trouble in
composing this piece."
Sse Yeoupe opened the paper and took up the
pen with the greatest self possession. He was
now to shew whether or not he was a true poet and
a man of talent.
The tricks of successful folly
Exist but for an hour.
Time alone will expose them,
And the fool that uses them becomes the laughing-stock
of mankind.
In the next chapter we shall see in what manner
Sse Yeoupe executed the verses which he had been
required to write.
or, THE TWO COUSINS.
227
CHAPTER X.
THE DEPARTURE OF THE CRANE, AND THE RE-
TURN OF THE SWALLOW.
" The career of this world is a subject the reflecting upon which
should be commenced at an early hour. It cannot be got through in the
course of an evening and a morning. He who aims at success, should
be continually on his guard against a thousand accidents. How many
preparations are necessary before the sour plum beginsto sweeten ! Joy
nevertheless sometimes springs from the bosom of sorrow, and bitter-
ness itself becomes a sweet. But if supreme happiness was to be at-
tained in the space of an hour, of what use would be in life the
noblest sentiments 1"
SSE Yeoupe, holding in his hand the paper that had
been given him, unfolded it, and saw that it was a
blank sheet, and that no subject had been writ-
ten upon it. " Since your mistress desires to put
me to the proof," said he to Yansou, " why has she
not written upon this sheet the subject that she
wishes I should treat?"
" My mistress thinks that the band-writing
of a maiden should not be indiscreetly produced
beyond the interior apartment ; and as for the sub-
ject, she charged me to communicate it to you
verbally."
"That is a proof of great reserve and circum-
spection on her part: have the kindness to inform
me what the subject is."
"There are two," replied Yansou; "the first is
the Farewell to the crane, and the second, the
Welcoming of the swallow. The farewell to the
crane must rhyme with the word nothing, and the
228
JU-KIAO-LI:
welcoming of the swallow with the word nest.
Each stanza must be written in verses of seven
syllables."
"The subject is not a difficult one," exclaimed
Sse Yeoupe; " but your young mistress is very kind,
and possesses infinite wit!"
" How does your lordship see that ?" asked
Yansou."
"We are at present in that season when the sum-
mer is about to succeed the spring. It is exactly
the time when the cranes depart and the swallows
return. But the metaphorical sense which she gives
to the Farewell to the crane, alludes to the desire
that she feels to dismiss the lord Tchang and that
of the Welcoming of the swallow, denotes her willing-
ness to give me a favourable reception. The fare-
well to the crane should rhyme with the word no-
thing, because the lord Tchang is a man of nothing.
The welcoming of the swallow should rhyme with
the word nest, which is the emblem of the esta-
blishment she is desirous I should form here. If
she had not an infinite deal of wit, how could she
have designated all these things ? On my side I
do not wish to lose myself in vain imaginings I
must approach your young mistress; and since she
has condescended to give me this subject to treat, I
see open before me all sorts of unhoped-for blisses.
O Sse Yeoupe! thy life shall not pass away use-
lessly!" And after having mixed the ink, he
seized a pen, placed the paper across a large
stone of an irregular shape, and was about to com-
mence writing.
" A moment, sir, if you please ! Moderate your
joy a little," said Yansou to him. "There still re-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
229
mains a little difficulty upon the subject in ques-
tion."
" What more is there?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
" Each verse," replied Yansou, " must commence
with one of these eight words : metal, stone, cord,
reed, gourd, earth, skin, wood*. My mistress says,
that marriage is an affair of great importance, and
that its commencement ought to be regulated by
rites and music ; but that as in fact the present
proceeding, which is a little or so irregular, will not
230
JU-KIAO-LI:
permit having recourse to these, the present condi-
tion must be taken in lieu of them."
Sse Yeoupe shook his head several times. " She
is right, she is right," said he: " so much purity
must procure her universal respect." As he spoke
thus, his mind became suddenly elevated; the
source of his poetical thoughts overflowed; and im-
pelled by the desire of shewing off the brilliancy
of his imagination, he seized the pen. As dra-
gons are seen to bound along as they run, or as
the wind drives the rain impetuously before it, in
like manner, and in a very little time, was he seen
to cover the paper with pearls and precious stones
strewed about as if by chance.
Nourished by the study of ten thousand different works,
The pen in hand, one is equal to the gods.
Let not humility take its rank amongst virtues :
Genius never yields the palm that belongs to it.
Sse Yeoupe in the space of a few moments com-
posed, upon the double subject proposed, two pieces
of verse, which he wrote one half in running cha-
racters, and the other half in regular, and when he
had entirely filled the sheet of paper, he took it in
both his hands, and presented it to Yansou, saying
to her, Be kind enough to give this to your
young mistress. I hope it may be found that I
have not shewn myself unworthy of executing her
orders."
Yansou, who had observed that Sse Yeoupe's
pencil bad never stopped for an instant, and who saw
that he had written two pieces of poetry in so short
a space, was at the same time surprised and en-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
231
chanted. " I know not," said she, " what your
verses contain, but this prodigious promptitude
effaces the lustre of the blue nnuphar. It inspires
me with the most profound respect for you. For
several years the object of my mistress's vows has
been talent; it may now be said, that she has found
him who possesses it."
" Sorry verses composed in haste, and merely
through obedience, will be far from satisfying, I
fear, the delicate taste of your young mistress.
But, youthful maiden, I still reckon upon your
assistance on this occasion. Until the end of my
days I shall consider myself indebted to your good
offices."
"My lord, I am going to take your verses with
me, but it is already somewhat late. I fear that I
shall not be able to come back to take your orders
to-day. I entreat you to return home ; as the
company who are in the front part of the house
will not depart to-morrow, the lord Tchang will
consequently not be able to dispose of his own
time. Contrive to meet me here. I shall without
doubt have some good news to tell you."
" The lateness of the hour obliges me to retire ;
but might I not take advantage of the darkness,
and whilst there is no one in the way, endeavour
to see, at least in profile, your young mistress?"
" That is a strange proposal, sir," replied Yan-
sou. " Miss Houngiu is a person of no less virtue
than merit, and her whole conduct is exactly re-
gulated according to the rules. What she is doing
at present, relates to the most important affair of
her life. No one can blame a young girl for the
care she takes to choose a husband worthy of her.
232
JU-KIAO-LI:
But what your lordship has asked, would prove that
you have a great deal of talent, but little virtue ;
you would thereby force my mistress to think the
less worthily of you, and all your pains would
be thrown away."
Sse Yeoupe, a little disconcerted, hastened to
make an excuse. " I have been guilty of an indis-
cretion," he said " young maiden, your reply is
full of reason; it is gold and jasper. I shall follow
most scrupulously your advice. But in taking leave
of you, permit me to remind you of your engagement
for to-morrow. I entreat of you not to fail in it."
" I shall certainly not fail to keep it," said Yan-
sou.
Sse Yeoupe made her a profound bow and
after having taken leave of her, he went out by the
garden gate, and got away without being per-
ceived.
Yansou put the paper containing the verses in
her sleeve, took up the ink-stand and the pens,
and with a laughing and a contented air returned
to
find her mistress. "This young Mr Sse has a
great deal of penetration," said she to her.
" How dost thou know that ?" asked Houngiu.
" I told him your subject, and at the first view
he comprehended all that you had wished to say ;
he explained it to me word for word, and seemed
as if he could never be tired of praising your
wit. If he had not had himself twice as much
as was necessary, how could he have guessed all
that?"
"He may have some penetration; but as to his
poetical talent, what am I to think of it? The two
copies of verses, the commencing and concluding
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
233
words of which are arbitrary, are too difficult to
have been written in so short a time. Why hast
thou returned so soon? Is it the darkness that has
prevented him from continuing to write, or has he
gone home to finish them ?"
Yansou began to laugh. If he had not finished
his verses before going away," said she, " he would
not only have been unworthy of your esteem, but
he would have lost mine."
" If he has not carried them away, why then has
he not finished them?" asked Houngiu.
" And who told you that he has not finished
them? He unfolded the sheet of flowered paper,
he took the pen, and without stopping a single
instant to reflect, he let his hand run on. I was
close to his side observing him : he did not even
turn his eyes away once; and his two pieces of
poetry were written in less than no time. He will
certainly make people die for love of him: he is
really an accomplished young man, and the best
husband that any one could choose. Endeavour,
Miss, by some means or other, not to let him
escape."
"And where then are these verses?" said Houn-
giu. Yansou took them from her sleeve, and pre-
sented them to her young mistress. 'Are not these
the verses?" said she. "Did Miss Houngiu sup-
pose that I should dare to jest with or impose upon
her?"
Houngiu took them, and at the first glance re-
marked an elegance and perfection in the writing
that struck the view, and favourably predisposed
the reader. She then read attentively what follows:
234
JU-KIAO-LI:
FAREWELL TO THE CRANE.
(Rhyming in Chinese with the word nothing.)
Autumn with its golden tints conceals from us the dreari-
ness of the later season;
The fern of the rocks, the rushes of the sands, have less
force in spring than at this moment;
The silky willow, covered with its full-grown leaves,
appears, o Crane, to announce thy departure!
And the cool zephyr, as it waves the branches of the
bamboo, whispers us that happy dreams will pre-
cede thy return.
The gourd, still free, has attained the extremity of its
stalk,
And the seeds of thy native land recall thee to the
countries of the north.
The dark visaged Tartar awaits thee to exercise his
arrows.
The keeper of the magnaleas has his eye open to thy
stratagems.
THE WELCOMING OF THE SWALLOW.
(Rhyming in Chinese to the word uset.)
The golden-branched Cytisus awaits the nest that is to
be the etreat of a happy couple;
A path set with pebbles will lead to it by a winding way,
The silky foliage adds its shade to the thickness of the
trellis work.
But already the scorching wind has strewed the earth
with flowers.
Black robed bird, the gourd does not console thee in thy
affiction;
But do not shed a torrent of tears, when thinking of thy
country:
If they should even still wish to enclose thee within a
double wall,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
235
From the top of the gallery, perfumed by these shrubs,
Thou would'st plunge into the mysterious retreat where
thy mate awaits thee.
Houngiu read these two pieces of poetry one after
the other, and when she had finished them, she
could not repress her admiration. "What a fine ta-
lent! she exclaimed ; what admirable talent! Not
only the arbitrary words at the beginning and end
of the verses seem to have placed themselves there
without any effort, but the sentiments and thoughts
to which they relate are natural, and the expression
and phrases are fraught with a charming delicacy.
Truly, all the elegance of person remarkable in this
young man seems to be tranferred to this paper.
The esteem with which he inspires me will not be
absent frem my mind either sleeping or waking.
But this brute Tchang has thrown an obstacle in
the way of our wishes by introducing himself here.
How shall we get rid of him?"
"That is not very difficult," said Yansou. 'If
you go to your father, and speak to him on the sub-
ject, you fear perhaps that he will suspect that
there is some intrigue going on. But why do you
not order my lord Sse to call upon him, and ex-
plain all that has taken place Should he once be
confronted with this animal Tchang, the truth will
soon discover itself."
" Yes, that is true; but it is better to let things go
on quietly, and thus avoid new sources of dissension.
Dost thou not remember, when my father was at
court, to what storms he found himself exposed for
having refused to form a connexion with the family
of the inspector-general Yang? We have in this
odious being a man skilled in all kinds of knaveries,
236
JU-KIAO-LI:
and totally devoid of principle. Should we force
him to expose his stupidity, it might be the cause
of some misfortune to young Sse, who, as an un-
protected orphan, would in all likelihood become
the victim."
"Your reflections are perfectly just but I dread
that if you thus endeavour to guard against the
head and the tail, that you never will attain the
end of your wishes."
' A thought strikes me. The best thing to be
done is to engage young Sse to set out immediately
for the capital. When he shall be no longer here,
that fool Tchang will have nobody to hold the pen
for him. I shall then beg of my father to put him
again to the proof: the fogs will be dispersed,
and he will quit the house. In the mean time we
shall tell young Sse to call upon my uncle, and ask
him for a letter of introduction to my father. In
this manner everything may be admirably well
arranged."
This decision fully satisfied Yansou. Miss
Houngiu," said she, " " your idea is an excellent
one ; the lord Sse was perfectly right, when he
praised your wit and penetration. You will make
a truly perfect couple, a beautiful woman and a
man of talent It is heaven that has made you for
each other ; but it is Yansou who has discovered all
this !"
After the two young girls had thus laid down
their plan, Houngiu again took up the copy of
verses, to read them a second time; and Yansou
went to listen to what was going on in the front
part of the house. She there learned that governor
Yang was to remain another day, and that Tchang-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
237
fanjou would be obliged to keep him company-so
that he consequently could not find time to come
into the garden behind the house.
Sse Yeoupe, informed of this circumstance, waited
till the hour of noon was past, and then in the same
manner as before entered the garden and made his
way up to the gallery, where he concealed him-
self. He had been there but a short time, when he
saw Yansou running towards his hiding-place with
a laughing and contented air. She immediately
came up to him, and said, "You are a man of your
word, sir."
Sse Yeoupe replied to her smile, and hastened to
salute her. " Entirely filled with the idea of your
young mistress," he said, "I have run hither, im-
patient to receive her orders. Have you really any-
thing favourable to tell me? Ought I to give credit
to your words ? What obligation I shall be under
to you, young maiden! You exert yourself with un-
tiring zeal-you have not been a minute behind
your promise-you merit a gratitude that should
have neither end nor limit."
" When a wise man seeks a virtuous girl, why
should the virtuous girl not be sensible to the love
of the wise man?" said Yansou. "And when we
see such well-assorted sentiments, why should we
not be zealous in seconding them?"
" Young maiden," resumed Sse Yeoupe, ' tell
me what you have to say, promptly: give new force
to my heart, already filled with love and hope."
" What need is there of vain discourses?" said
Yansou. " My mistress has read and re-read two
or three times, with the greatest possible attention,
the two beautiful pieces of poetry that you gave
238
UKIAO-LI:
me yesterday. She cannot put them out of her
hands even for a moment. She is convinced that
though you are but a man, you will one day or
other surpass the Genii."
Your mistress then has condescended to ap-
prove of my poor compositions," exclaimed Sse
Yeoupe ; " but what orders has she sent me relative
to the humiliating pieces of knavery of which I
have been the dupe?"
66 Miss Houngiu and myself were for a long time
in consultation upon that point yesterday," replied
Yansou. We at first thought of disclosing all to
my master, but we feared that the affair would
have the air of an intrigue, and that fear closed my
mistress's mouth. She was then of opinion that
you yourself should go to her father and clear up
the affair, but again she became alarmed lest you
should thereby make an enemy of the lord Tchang,
and bring yourself into a thousand troubles. These
two plans appeared to her subject to too many in-
conveniences; and at length, after having reflected
upon it, she finds that there is but one safe path
to follow, and that is, for you not to remain here,
where you are surrounded by eyes and ears. She
therefore requires you to set out with all diligence
for the abode of her maternal uncle, and beg of him
to come hither and make a proposal of marriage on
your part to her father. By this means there will
be no obstacle to your success. As for that in-
supportable personage Tchang, after your departure,
my mistress will entreat her father to send him
away, and then all will be one between you both."
Your mistress's plan appears to me excellent,"
replied Sse Yeoupe, " and it may be said that she
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
239
has forgotten nothing. But there is one thing that
afflicts me: whilst 1 am afar seeking a protection,
many a day will pass away; and if in the interval
there should come some man of merit, more prompt
in his courtship than I have been, and obtain her, what
would become of Sse Yeoupe ? And in what place
could he make his complaints be heard?'
" Sir," resumed Yansou, " beware of insulting
my mistress. She has a heart filled with rectitude
and great firmness of character she yields in
nothing to the heroines of the ancient times. She
has this day given her word-gold and jasper never
change. You may, sir, set out on your journey
with a mind perfectly tranquil be fully assured
that until your return the oriental bed * shall be
guarded with inviolable fidelity."
After this assurance, youthful maiden, I shall set
off this very day, and seek this lord, the maternal
uncle of your young mistress; but tell me, who is
he ?"
" The maternal uncle of Miss Houngiu is the
lord Gou, one of the members of the academical
college. In whatever place you may inquire for
him, there is no person who does not know him."
She had not done speaking when all of a sudden
were heard the voices of persons who were ap-
proaching the garden and crying out, Gardener,
sweep upon this side here; for the lord Yang is
coming to take a collation in the garden." On
hearing these words, Yansou said hurriedly to Sse
Yeoupe, " Our conversation is now at an end; go
away quickly, sir; it will be useless for you to
return hither, for you will not be able to see me."
240
JU-KIAO-LI :
And as she spoke, she darted into a grove of
flowering willows and disappeared.
Sse Yeoupe did not dare to remain any longer ;
he retired in all speed, and quitted the garden.
As he returned home, he gave himself up to his
reflections. She has just told me," thought he,
that the maternal uncle of her mistress is the
lord Gou, member of an academical college. It
appears to me that there is not at Kinling any other
doctor of the grand academy, of the name of Gou,
but Gou Touian if it should prove to be the same
man, behold me again in the midst of difficulties
and embarrassments. It is not long ago that he
wished me to marrv his daughter, which I refused
to do over and over again. He then deprived me
of the degree which I gained at the examinations.
Should I now call upon him, and ask him to be
my intercessor, I may be sure beforehand of meeting
with a refusal. But even supposing he would
grant my request, how could I have the face to go
in person and make the demand ?"
Thus communing with himself upon the road, he
arrived without perceiving it at the garden of
Tchangfanjou. Wangwenhiang, who had at this
time some affairs in the town, had not been there
for several days. The gardener and Siaohi met
him at the gate: he sent them to supper, and then
retired to bed.
When he rose the next morning, he wrote to
Tchangfanjou and Wangwenhiang, informing them
of his departure and as fortunately he had no
baggage, he ordered Siaohi to bring him a horse,
and he took the road leading to the convent of
Kouanyin. He wished to bid farewell to Tsingin
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
241
and learn from him at the same time if Dr Gou was
the same person as Gou Touian.
Chance so willed it that he found Tsingin at
the great gate of the convent, occupied in looking
at a young novice sweeping the ground. As soon
as Tsingin saw him, he advanced eagerly to meet
him, and while saluting him said, "I have seen
but little of you, lord Sse, these last few days.
What makes you abroad so early this morning?
" I am going back to the city, and am come only
to bid you farewell, my master, and return you my
thanks."
In that case," replied Tsingin, "I pray you
to enter our cell and have something to eat before
you set out."
"I have already breakfasted, and have need of
nothing in that way; but I have a question to ask
of you. Can you tell me if the brother-in-law of
the counsellor of state Pe, who is called Gou, be
the same person as Gou Touian, doctor of the grand
academy?"
" It is the same. A short time back he returned
from office under what pretext I know not; but I
have heard that he has been recalled and has re-
turned to the court. Had he been living at home,
you would have seen him here continually."
This information gave Sse Yeoupe not a little
dissatisfaction. He immediately took leave of
Tsingin, re-mounted his horse, and rode off towards
the extremity of the village leading to the capital.
On the other hand, seeing that it was impossible for
him to address himself to Dr Gou, he was tempted
to return to the garden of Tchangfanjou, and endea-
242
JU-KIAO-LI:
vour to obtain some further explanations from Yan-
sou. But that girl had told him that he should not
again be able to see her. Besieged and tormented
by these thoughts, he let his horse take his own
way, and the animal sometimes hastened forward,
and then slackened his pace, as it pleased himself.
The wisest man, deceived in his hopes, is like a dog that
has strayed from his master's house
The reprobate, who succeeds in concealing himself, is
like a fish escaped from the net;
The wise man, seeing himself on the point of losing a
happy marriage,
Exhausts himself, 110 matter what path he may choose,
or what expedient he may adopt, in useless agitation.
Sse Yeoupe mounted upon his horse, pursued his
journey, a prey to all sorts of irresolute and afflict-
ing ideas, when a reflection sprung up in his mind.
On coming here some time ago," said he to him-
self, " it was my intention to go to Keouyoung, and
consult the Hermit of Gratitude. The adventure
which brought me acquainted with Miss Pe has
kept me here a long time, and made me lose sight
of the project; but since this hermit was aware that
my motive in quitting home was relative to a mar-
riage, now that that marriage is fixed upon, and
yet that a difficulty lies in my way that I cannot
surmount, why should I not go and consult him ?"
And he immediately turned his horse's head towards
the south-west, in which direction lay the road to
Keouyoung.
He had not proceeded more than two miles t,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
243
when a new reflection made him pause: " The other
day, when I wished to consult the hermit, it was
about a marriage, with regard to which nothing was
then determined; but at present there is nothing un-
certain upon that point. Miss Pe exists, and if I
do not obtain her for my wife, I shall never marry
any one else; I have no other person in view--all
I seek is the means of approaching her. Yansou
told me in the most explicit manner possible, that
she wished that I should go and see Dr Gou. It is
myself alone I have to consult as to the conduct
that I should adopt. What need have I to question
this hermit? Supposing I should consult him, and
he should tell me that the affair will terminate hap-
pily, I must nevertheless go in person and make the
proposal. Surely he could not do it for me; and if
he should tell me that the marriage was impossible,
ought I for that reason renounce my intentions It
is much better that I follow the advice of Yansou,
and present myself before the old man. The first
and most important step is to call upon Gou Touian.
Probably he himself has changed his mind with re-
gard to the marriage he proposed to me." This
new determination obliged him again to change his
route, and follow that which he had already tra-
velled. He had not rode more than ten miles * ,
when he perceived that much time had been wasted
during his irresolutions, and going backwards and
forwards, for the sun had already attained the middle
of his career. He felt himself hungry, and having
stopped his horse, he looked about on all sides. He
perceived to the south-west of the high road a vil-
lage, to which he had some idea of going, in order
244
JU-KIAO-LI:
to buy provisions, but he was not certain if he should
find an inn there. As he was yet deliberating with
himself, he saw a man on horseback, followed by
four servan's on foot, approaching him. As they
came nearer, both perceived, with equal joy and
surprise, that they were acquaintances. The tra-
veller was the first to speak, exclaiming " What
brings you here, brother Liansian?"
" I was asking myself," quickly replied Sse
Yeoupe, who you might be, and I find that you
are my brother Yantsoung. It would require
more than one word to tell you-"
" It is now a long time since I have seen you,"
interrupted the new comer "but yet you have
never been absent from my thoughts. Now that
we have met, this is not a very commodious place
to converse together. Fortunately my residence
is close by. Do me the favour to accompany me
thither."
" Where is your house?" asked Sse Ycoupe.
" There," replied the other, pointing with his
finger to the middle of the village.
"
Not to tell you a lie," resumed Sse Yeoupe,
" myself, my servant, and my horse, are at this mo-
ment in want of some refreshment; and it was upon
this subject I was deliberating when you came "p.
Since your residence is not far distant, I fear I shall
be obliged to cause you some trouble."
The traveller, quite satisfied, brought his horse
along side that of Sse Yeoupe, and they took the
road leading to the village.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
245
But it is not by merit and renown that the world is
affected.
Is it prudent to accept of hospitality in all places?
The family name of the new comer was Sse his
little name was Yeoute, and his title of honour
Yantsoung. Though he bore the same family name
as Sse Yeoupe, there was no relationship between
them, but they had been fellow-students in the same
college. The new comer had not made any very
great progress in literature, but he was very rich.
He was now twenty-five years of age, and very
much addicted to wine and pleasure. He possessed,
it may be said, but one good quality, which was to
spend money with profusion, when he had his house
filled with company. As he was free from all re-
straint, he passed the greater part of his time in
the city, where he had a numerous acquaintance.
He was returning from it the day he met Sse
Yeoupe and invited him to his house.
On arriving before the door of the house, the two
friends dismounted from their horses and entered
the middle hall, After the usual compliments, Sse
Yeoute ordered his servants to serve up immediately
whatever was ready, for lord Sse was hungry; and
that when he should have satisfied his appetite, he
himself should wish to drink some cups with his
friend.
246
JU-KIAO-LI:
The servants obeyed; and when dinner had been
brought in, Sse Yeoute, addressing his guest, said,
It is now several months since I have seen you :
in every place where I have been, I took care to
inquire about you. What have you been doing
with yourself, my dear friend; and how happens it
that you are here ?"
" Some time after I had been deprived of my
degree," replied Sse Yeoupe, "my paternal uncle,
on his return from an inspection which he had been
making in the country of Tsou *, brought his bark
to anchor at the mouth of the great river, and sent
to inform me that he desired to take me with him
to court, where he was going for further orders from
the emperor. Having nothing to attach me to this
country, I accepted his proposal: but I have met
with so many obstacles on my road, that it has been
impossible for me to join him at the appointed
time; and my uncle, being unable to wait any
longer, has proceeded on his voyage. I then called
at the house of one of my friends, where I stopped
several days. A little affair required my presence
in the city, whither I was going when you met me.
Is it long since you have been there, my dear friend,
and what business took you there?"
" I obtained the third place at the last examina-
tions; but I do not wish to impose upon you, my
friend: I have no chance of succeeding at the pro-
vincial examinations next autumn. I must hit upon
some expedient, I must go and visit a little at the
examination-hall: although I have no hope of tri-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
247
umphing, yet it is always of use to close up people's
eyes and ears. This is what took me to the city,
where I have been staying seven or eight days.
The business, however, is not yet properly arranged.
I have not your eminent talent, my friend, and have
no right to expect to be placed at the head of the
list. You, who are so joyous and contented, and
who only want to be designated as first candidate,
to entitle you to take your seat at the banquet of
the Song of the Stag *, cannot form an idea of the
torment I suffer."
" You are jesting with me, my dear friend," said
Yeoupe: "I have no longer even a green collar+;
how then can I become first candidate?"
"You must have been a long time absent from
the city, since you do not as yet know what has
happened there," replied Sse Yeoute. "Within
the last few days the examiner caused an announce-
ment to be made in the college that you had been
restored to your degeee."
" Can that be true?" demanded Sse Yeoupe.
"I heard it with my own ears. Do you think I
should dare to impose upon you ?" said Sse Yeoute.
248
JU-KIAO-LI:
How could a man so subservient to the great and
persons in place as is the examiner, shew me such
a mark of kindness?"
"That is in no manner whatsoever the effect of
the examiner's kindness. I have heard it was at
the solicitation of a doctor of the grand academy,
the lord Gou, that the thing was done; your refusal
to marry his daughter had irritated him for the
moment, and he revenged himself by depriving you
of your degree : but the goodness of his heart soon
resumed its influence, and he considered that a
refusal to marry was not so great a crime. Besides,
he remarked that you had modestly retired without
making any noise about the matter, and that you
did not indulge in any disrespectful expressions
against him. His resentment was not proof against
your conduct; he spoke to the examiner, who im-
mediately reinstated you in your degree."
Sse Yeoupe was not less astonished than pleased
by this intelligence. " Friend Yantsoung, have
things really happened as you say?" he asked.
"This is the account given of the affair," replied
Sse Yeoute, "by the examiner, the keeper of the
books, and the other officers of the college: it is
not on my authority alone that it rests."
The joy that Sse Yeoupe felt at the news shewed
itself in his countenance. He had just finished
dining: he took in his hand a large cup of wine,
and drank it off at a draught. Sse Yeoute, seeing
what he did, said, "My brother, this is but a small
cause of joy for you; the great one will be next
autumn."
"Think you," said Sse Yeoupe, "that I attach
so much consequence to a degree obtained or with-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
249
drawn I have a very different cause for satis-
faction."
"I cannot perceive that you have any other than
that," said Sse Yeoute.
" Not to conceal anything from you," replied Sse
Yeoupe, "it is not because they have restored me my
degree that I rejoice; but what delights me is, that
it has been done at the solicitation of Gou Touian."
" Why so?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
" It is because I have," replied Sse Yeoupe, a
little affair, in which I wish to get the lord Gou to
interest himself. I had good reason to fear that his
resentment was not yet assuaged, and I therefore
felt unwilling to call upon him. Now that I per-
ceive that he still entertains some affection for me,
I shall go to-morrow and request his good offices,
and shall not feel at all embarrassed in speaking
to him : such is the cause of my satisfaction."
Sse Yeoute began to laugh. "May it not be,"
said he, "that you have changed your mind with
regard to his proposal, and that you are now going
to ask for the hand of his daughter ?-But his
daughter has been married since."
Not by any means," replied Sse Yeoupe.
" If that be not the case, then your reason for
going to him is because you know that he has in-
fluence with the examiners, and you wish to have
the advantage of being taken for his pupil."
You are farther than before from the fact," said
Sse Yeoupe, laughing.
What then can your motive be ?" said Sse
Yeoute.
Sse Yeoupe made no answer, but continued to
laugh.
250
JU-KIAO-LI:
"I have told you some good news," continued
Sse Yeoute, " and now that you have cause to re-
joice, why do you not inform me what it is ? Are
we not intimate friends In what way could I dis-
concert your projects ? Probably, if you acquaint
me with their nature, I may be able to assist you
Who knows ?"
Sse Yeoupe was in a state of great excitation, not
only from joy, but from the wine he had drunk, and
felt himself disposed to be communicative. It
is," said he, my dear friend, a business upon which
I had determined to consult you for why should I
conceal anything from you ? I have a marriage in
view, and I wish to get lord Gou to use his influence
with the family in my favour."
At these words Sse Yeoute, struck with an idea,
said, "Is it not the daughter of Pe Thaihiouan for
whom you wish him to propose?"
Sse Yeoupe, seeing that he made so good a guess,
could not refrain from bursting into a-loud laugh.
You are one of the Genii, my brother," he ex-
claimed.
It must be known that Sse Yeoute's residence
was close to the counsellor of state Pe's country
house, and that, for a long time back, he had
been perfectly aware of the beauty and talents of
Miss Pe, as well as of the extreme caution which
her father was determined to use in the choice of a
son-in-law. He had often regretted not having
been able to gain access to the house himself; and
now, seeing that Sse Yeoupe, who had come directly
from the village, wished to get doctor Gou to take
upon himself the office of a go-between, he had
on, THE TWO COUSINS.
251
little difficulty in guessing, at the first attempt, the
name of the lady in question. But, with an eye to
his own interest, he said, " It is useless to speak of
the beauty of Miss Pe; but her father is a most
intractable man : he has refused I know not how
many proposals for his daughter. Even should Gou
Touian speak in your favour, he will not be able to
win him to consent. Besides, I understand that
he has brought into his house, to live a certain
Tchang. Your only chance of succeeding in this
affair is to carry on a communication with the inte-
rior of the house."
When Sse Yeoupe perceived that he was so well
acquainted with the state of things, he told him
how he came to know Tchangfanjou-of his having
composed verses upon the vernal willows-of the
deception practised upon him by Tchangfanjou-and
how he had afterwards met Yansou. Sse Yeoute
listened with the greatest attention to his story, and
then said, " If things are at this stage, the best you
can do is to confide the matter to lord Gou: it is
very unfortunate that he has been recalled to court."
To court!" exclaimed Sse Yeoupe, were he
in heaven, I should go seek him there."
" If you wish to find him in the capital," resumed
Sse Yeoute, "why do you not set out immediately?
You can cross the great river a little distance from
this; there is no necessity for your returning to
town. You should go there speedily, and return
without delay; and you will still be in time for the
provincial examination."
" Certainly, it would be better to set out imme-
diately," replied Sse Yeoupe: "but it is a long way
from this to the court; and when I quitted home,
252
JU-KIAO-LI:
some time back, I made no preparations for so long
a journey, and did not even bring sufficient money
with me. I must therefore return to town to pro-
vide myself with whatever is necessary, and it is
only then that I can commence my journey."
" I am overjoyed," said Sse Yeoute, "at the pro-
spect of your good fortune. The money and bag-
gage necessary for your journey are of no great
consequence. I can procure you them; so that it
will ,not be necessary for you to return to the town,
and lose days and months."
" If you will be kind enough to lend me what is
necessary," said Sse Yeoupe, very well pleased with
the offer, " I shall set out immediately for the north,
and shall have no occasion to go back to the town;
but shall I ever be able to shew you my gratitude
for such an essential service?"
" Between friends," replied Sse Yeoute, " there
should be a community of goods. Formerly, as at
present, all those who were united by mutual affec-
tion acted in this manner. Why should you sup-
pose that I should not act in the same way to-
wards you? Let us drink and converse joyously
together, and to-morrow I shall see you commence
your journey."
"Those are the sentiments and language of a
true friend," said Sse Yeoupe : "besides, were I to
quit your house at present, I should be forced to
apply at some cottage for a night's lodging."
The two friends continued to talk and drink with
great cheerfulness. Sse Yeoupe wrote down the
verses upon the vernal willows and the red-blos-
somed pear-tree, to shew them to Sse Yeoute, who
praised them highly. The two young friends re-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
253
mained drinking till their heads became completely
warmed. They then separated-Sse Yeoupe remain-
ing in the library, where he passed the night. This
evening, as will be seen hereafter, brought about
an exchange of a peach for a plum, and a dispute
between a magpie and a ring-dove.
The fox lies still ;
The two teals are calling each other with harmonious
cries.
People drink together out of the same cup,
And each one derives a benefit from it.
It will be seen in another chapter how the two
friends separated.
SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES,
SUPPLIED BY
J. H. PICKFORD, Esq.,
M ember of the Asiatic Society of Paris.
Page 5, line 22.
WE are informed by Du Halde, that in the almanac or
calendar published annually by the emperor's authority,
the days and hours are divided into lucky and unlucky,
by judicial astrology : the time to marry, send invitations,
undertake journeys, Sc., are also pointed out in it. This
calendar is composed by the tribunal of mathematics.
Page 6, line 16, " queen-marguerites."
Chrysanthemum odoratum.
Page 14, line 7, " a couple of leagues," (erratum )
Read, "twenty miles," (in text *.)
Page 31, line 10, 66 humble means."
The Chinese always affect to speak meanly of them- -
selves, and consider it only polite to use magnificent terms
to those whom they address. Thus they say, the serrant of
your lordship, his excellency's humble slave, &c. ; even the
Very nearly six English miles.
N 2
256
NOTES.
illness of a superior, must be called the noble indisposi-
tion.-Du HALDE and SEMEDO.
Page 32, line 8 " host and his visitors."
Literally in the Chinese text, " masterly and guestly."
Page 35, line 16, " refreshments."
The word collation, in French, corresponds exceedingly
well to the Chinese expression, as they take all their meals
cold. Their drinks however, even their wines, are always
warmed.
Page 40, Note, imperial academy."
The analogy between the Chinese grand imperial academy,
and the French institnte is very complete, since the latter
enjoyed something of the same influence in the government,
which the former does. It may not be considered irrelevant
if I here give a sketch of the French institute.
At the commencement of the revolution, the three prin-
cipal academies of France were suppressed, but were soon
afterwards revived by the government under the name of
the institute. The institute upon its formation was com-
posed of three classes, the word academy being abolished
as savouring too much of the ancien regime. These classes
were :-1st. Classe des Sciences Physiques et Mathematiques.
2nd. Classe des Sciences Morales et Politiques. 3rd, Classe de
Littrature et de Beaux Arts. These were reckoned among
the constitutional powers of the commonwealth ; nothing li-
terary or scientific being undertaken without their sanction.
Upon Napoleon coming into power, he consulted them
only at his own discretion, thus, to a certain extent, abridg-
ing their influence ; he also increased the number of the
NOTES.
257
classes to four, and altered, in some respects, their form.
They were in his time as follows :-
1st. Classe des Sciences, Naturelles et Mathmatiques. 2nd.
Classe de Langue, et de la Littrature Frunaise. 3rd. Classe
de l'Histoire et de Littrature Ancienne. 4th. Classe de Beaux
Arts. Upon the restoration of Louis XVIII to the throne,
the institute remained in exactly similar circumstances,
as far as power was concerned, undergoing, however, ano-
ther alteration in the names of the classes, which again
became academies. This form it still retains, and is,-1st.
Academie Franaise; or, academy of French literature. 2nd.
Academie des Inscriptions et de Belles Lettres, or, academy
of ancient or oriental history and philology. This aca-
demy was established by Louis XIV, for the express pur-
pose of writing inscriptions for his monuments, coins, &c.,
3rd. Academie des Sciences; or natural philosophy, physics,
and mathematics. 4th. Academie de Beaux Arts; or, music,
painting, architecture, &c.
Each academy, which is perfectly distinct from the others,
and consists of from forty to fifty members, has an an-
nual president, chosen by ballot, Vacancies are filled
up by election, subject to the approval of the sovereign.
The meetings of each academy, are held once a week ;
and once a year there is a public meeting of each academy,
and also a general one of all four at the same time. The
king is the patron of the institute.
Page 83, line 2, 'ministry of ceremonies."
The province of the ministry of the rites, is to see that
the ancient rites and ceremonies are observed throughout
the empire to inspect titles of honour, and marks of dis-
tinction, to receive, entertain, and dismiss foreign ambas-
sadors, &c.-Du HALDE.
258
NOTES.
Page 83, line 4, "public works."
This court superintends all the emperor's buildings,
and takes cognizance of all the towers, bridges, rivers,
canals, highways, &c., throughout the empire.-Du HALDE.
Page 85, line 24, " minutest search."
An order similar to a search warrant, by virtue of which
he could enter Pe's house.
Page 86, line 4, " passport."
A stamped paper of this kind, empowers the bearer to
demand and obtain post-horses free of expense; it is
also his security in the event of being stopped and inter-
rogated by the proper authorities. Great respect is every.
where shewn to this official document.
Page 86, line 9, " female of the second rank."
The laws of China, though they allow a man to have but
one wife, strictly so called, yet permit him to have several
second wives, or wives of the second rank, who are by no
means disreputable persons. They are, however, greatly
dependant on the first wife, who alone is mistress of the
house : their children are considered as children of the first,
inherit equally with her own, and dine at the same table,
whilst their mothers, the second wives, are excluded from
this last.
Page 93, line 3 from the bottom, " his mourning being
over."
For a father, mother, or the emperor, the Chinese mourn
three years, during which period they wear coarse white
garments, and retire from all public employments, Esc.
NOTES.
259
Page 124, line 22, "remedy."
The emperor Yingtsoong ultimately returned from his
captivity, but was compelled by the reigning emperor, his
younger brother, to abdicate the throne.
Page 131, line 1, " ounce of silver."
Six shillings and three pence.
Page 58, line 8, "Wen, (literature) and of Hiang, (to look.)
Erratum-should be " Wan, literature, and King, magistrate."
Page 159, note, "midnight."
The Chinese divide the night into five watches, of two
hours each, and the natural day into twelve hours ; their
first hour begins at our eleven at night, and terminates at
our one in the morning, and 80 of the rest.
Page 166 note (erratum)
Twelve shillings and sixpence.
Page 171, line 15.
One English mile.
Page 205, last line, "yelo."
Tol de rol.
Page 221, line 32, " miles."
Seventeen or twenty English miles.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
LONDON:
Printed by WILLIAM CLOWES,
14, Charing Cross.
of
HARVARD UNIVERSITY
http://lib.harvard.edu
If the item is recalled, the borrower will
be notified of the need for an earlier return.
WINENER
JUL29@02607
CANCELLED
Thank you for helping us to preserve our collection!
