IU-KIAO-LI:
OR,THE
TWO FAIR COUSINS.
CHAPTER XI.
TWO MUCH EAGERNESS WILL SOMETIMES CAUSE
US TO TURN OUR BACKS UPON THE OBJECT WE
ARE IN SEARCH OF.
" The most inaccessible retreat will not secure a beautiful flower from
being gathered. To the ardour inspired by a charming object nothing
is unattainable. The delicate lily is exposed to the insults of the wind
and the rain, and the odorous bud to the attacks of the butterfly and the
wasp. Do not let yourself be guided by an unbounded confidence in all
situations. A true poet should avoid indiscreet frivolity. The com-
plaints of an unfortunate lover are listened to with an interested ear but
a few broken branches cannot obscure in him the brilliancy of talent."
SSE YEOUTE had been greatly mortified at learning
that an understanding existed between Sse Yeoupe
and Miss Pe, and he resolved to meddle with the
affair. The next morning, after the two friends had
breakfasted, Sse Yeoute gave orders to get ready
the provisions necessary for the journey, and then,
taking twenty ounces of silver *, offered them to
Sse Yeoupe, saying, " Here is a little sum for the
2
JU-KIAO-LI:
expenses of the road; take it, my brother, and be
sure to go and return with all possible speed ; you
have not a moment to lose. The lord Pe is a man
not easily prevailed upon. I should dread that, if
he has any other plan in view, his daughter even
will have no little difficulty to bring him to accede
to her wishes."
Your aid and advice are equally precious to
me," replied Sse Yeoupe "they impose upon me
the most unbounded gratitude. I shall make no
stay at the court; but the instant I obtain the letter
from the lord Gou, I shall set out on my return, and
travel night and day: should I succeed in my pro-
jects I shall entirely owe it to your generosity."
On saying these words, he ordered Siaohi to take
the baggage, and rose up. Sse Yeoute called one
of his servants, and said to him, The lord Sse is
not acquainted with the roads in the neighbourhood
of this village; you will conduct him to the mouth
of the river, and do not return till you have seen
him cross it." After the servant had received this
order, Sse Yeoupe took leave, mounted his horse,
and set out at a quick pace for the capital.
Now it is necessary to be known, that doctor
Gou, as soon as he had received the decree recalling
him to court, immediately made choice of a fortu-
nate day upon which to commence his journey: but
at the moment of his departure, he felt himself
seriously indisposed at the conclusion of a farewell
banquet to which he had been invited by the pre-
fect. He felt a coldness in the stomach, and the
malady became so alarming, that he was obliged to
be taken back to his own house, where he was con-
fined for a month, and was only beginning to reco-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
3
ver at the period of which we are speaking. Sse
Yeoute had learned this circumstance during his
visit to the city, and fearing that Sse Yeoupe might
also become acquainted with it, should he make
any inquiries after doctor Gou, and thereby be
enabled to counteract the plans he had in view, he
invented the story he told Sse Yeoupe, and lent him
twenty ounces of silver, in order to induce him to
go direct to the capital. During this fruitless jour
ney, which left the field open to himself, he resolved
to execute the project he had imagined.
The reprobate laughs till he finds some one more wicked
than himself:
By his knaveries he takes advantage of the innocence of
the upright man.
But who knows if Heaven will not send forth one still
more knavish,
Who will cause his intrigues to favour the triumph of
innocence ?
Sse Yeoute, quite delighted at having persuaded
Sse Yeoupe to take a journey into the north, said
to himself," had myself directed my views towards
Miss Pe: she was the object of all my thoughts, but
I could see no prospect of success. It scarcely
ever occurred to me that so fortunate a combina-
tion of circumstances as the present should offer
itself: this is one of the instances in which it may
be said that heaven conforms itself to the desires of
man."
Without loss of time he provided himself with a
card of grand ceremony, and proceeded to the town
to pay a visit to doctor Gou. On coming to his
door, he first sent in a servant, who was to give to
the porter a little packet containing five pieces of
4
JU-KIAO-LI:
money before presenting him the visiting card,
and to say to him, "Mr Sse, my master, wishes to
see his lordship: will you be good enough to take
the trouble to announce him?
To this request the porter replied, "The lord my
master is but just recovering from sickness; he has
as yet seen no one, and I fear that he is not in a
state to receive visitors."
"We shall be satisfied with what your master
shall decide upon that point," replied the servant:
"there is a message which you will take the trouble
to deliver him."
The porter having received the little packet, and
seeing that there was also a card of ceremony, no
longer refused. "I shall take your message to my
master," he said; ' in the mean time beg the gen-
tleman to enter the saloon and sit down."
The servant brought back the answer to Sse
Yeoute, and enjoined him to change his head-dress
before entering the saloon; he then took the usual
presents and piaced them at the foot of the stair-
case. The porter, holding the two tickets in his
hand, carried them to his master, who was in a
saloon at the back of the house.
At this period doctor Gou, who had only begun
to be convalescent, had quitted his bed, and was at
the moment in a pavilion at the bottom of the gar-
den, breathing the fresh air and endeavouring to
recover his strength, being resolved, as soon as he
was perfectly recovered, to repair to court. On the
cards being handed to him, he first cast his eyes
upon the one which bore the name of the visitor,
and read these words: " Your very much obliged
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
5
disciple Sse Yeoute presents you his respects and
salutations." He then read the card of ceremony,
and saw that the list of presents consisted of stuffs,
wonswong tablets, trimmings for clothes, and other
similar objects, amounting in value to a hundred
ounces of silver*. " I am not acquainted with this
young man," said he to himself; "he must have
some particular motive to shew me all at once such
a great demonstration of politeness."
Then addressing himself to the porter, he gave
him his orders in the following words: Go tell
Mr Sse that I am but just recovering from a fit of
sickness, and am not yet capable of fulfilling the
duties of hospitality, and cannot therefore receive
visits ;-that since he has deigned to honour me
with a visit, he must have something to communi-
cate to me;-that if it be not a very pressing busi-
ness, he can see me another day; but if it be of a
very urgent nature, there is no obstacle to his com-
municating it to me in person;-that as to the
presents, I cannot permit myself to accept them, and
on that account I send him back the list."
The porter returned with this answer, and repeated
it word for word to Sse Yeoute. The latter, having
heard it, replied, " If that be the case, go and tell
your master that his disciple came to speak to him
about a marriage which his younger brother Sse
Yeoupe has in view;-that there are some difficulties
in the way that may be removed by the interview
which I solicit; but that, as he cannot receive any
visits at present, I must of course return another
day;-that as to these trifles, he must at least
6
JU-KIAO-LI:
accept some of them. Take the trouble to go back
and repeat these words to your master."
The porter returned to doctor Gou, who, on
hearing the name of Sse Yeoupe and the word
marriage, said, " Go instantly, and ask if this Sse
Yeoupe is the same who recently obtained the first
place at the examinations held by the examiner Li."
The porter went to ask this question, and returned
with the answer, "It is the same person, master."
" In that case," said doctor Gou, " "go and beg Mr
Sse to come to me here in the garden."
The porter hastened back to Sse Yeoute, and said
to him, "My master invites you, sir, to come into
the garden, where you will find him;" and he led
Sse Yeoute through the great gate, and round the
house, to the garden at the rear. There he ushered
him into a hall, and begged him to sit down. A
short time after, doctor Gou appeared, leaning upon
the arm of a little valet. As soon as he saw him,
Sse Yeoute quickly brought an arm-chair to the
upper end of the hall, and said, "My respectable
and excellent master, deign to be seated, I pray
you, and let your disciple present you his respects."
"I have been extremely ill," replied doctor Gou,
" and cannot yet bear any fatigue: it will not be
shewing me any real affection if you insist upon the
strict observance of the usual ceremonies; it will be
better to confine ourselves to a simple salutation *."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
7
"My respectable master, if such be your plea-
sure, I shall not attempt to disobey you; but it
will be on my part a want of respect and a serious
fault:" and so saying, Sse Yeoute made the desired
salutation. Doctor Gou prayed him to lay aside
his outer garment (habit de ville), and they both,
after the usual compliments *, sat down.
After tea had been brought in, the doctor, ad-
dressing his guest, said, "The person of whom you
spoke some time back, and who bears the name of
Yeoupe, is your younger brother?"
" We are not of the same blood by the mother,"
replied Sse Yeoute; " but he is in fact my younger
brother. He is an ill-bred and arrogant young
man, who knows nothing of the world. By refusing
the marks of goodness which you, my respectable
master, bestowed upon him two or three times, he has
opened the door to sin. When, afterwards, the
honourable examiner condescended to punish him,
it was nothing more than the merited fruit of his
works and yet you were unwilling to aggravate his
position, and your pity even came to his assistance;
for that reason you are entitled to the most un-
bounded gratitude. Since then you have oblite-
rated all traces of his humiliation, he has long been
desirous of putting his head in the dust + at the
foot of your staircase; but not being able to assume
8
JU-KIAO-LI:
courage enough, I have come in his stead to make
you his excuses."
" There was a moment," replied the doctor,
" when, in order to prop up the feeble stalk of a
gourd, I wished for the support of a wise man. I
had not then considered that a house which had
only the walls, was not fitted to receive your bro-
ther, who, though so young, has such remarkable
talents and lofty hopes. It was with pleasure I
remarked in him qualities equally amiable and
honourable, and that was what made me think
of him. It is I alone who have been guilty of a
fault; your brother has nothing to accuse him-
self of. But tell me, I pray you, what is your
intention in now alluding to this marriage?"
"My brother refused in a moment of blindness
and stupidity. But he soon repented of what he
had done, and he now deplores having closed the
path to heaven upon himself. Since he learned to
appreciate your goodness, my illustrious master,
that goodness high as heaven, and deep as the
earth, he has conceived the desire of taking root at
the foot of the wall of your house and since he
has lately been informed, that the young lady your
daughter has, conformably to the decision of fate,
united her voice to the concert of the phenix, his
road through life has no longer any prospect to cheer
him. Thus disappointed in his hopes, he has
thought of transferring them to another object.
Having learned that his excellency, the intendant
of the public works, the lord Pe, your relation, had
a daughter, your niece, whose youth and beauty
lend each other mutual charms, he has had the te-
merity to think, that if he could obtain this new
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
9
trunk of a tree for a support, he might still aspire
to the advantage of uniting the plum to the peach
of your house; for the threshold of your door is
for him the line that separates heaven from the
abyss. These perhaps are the foolish imaginings
of a poor student. But he has already been inun-
dated, by his respectable and excellent master,
with marks of goodness that have so surpassed his
merits, that he does not blush to solicit a conti-
nuance of them. I know not, my respectable mas-
ter, if you are still disposed to overlook his former
errors, and if in this circumstance you are willing
to support or overthrow him."
"Such being the case," said Dr Gou, very much
delighted, " I will not allow you to remain any
longer in error. The person whom I proposed to
him some time back was not my daughter, but my
niece herself."
'The young lady your niece!" exclaimed Sse
Yeoute, very much surprised.
" Yes, my niece," replied the doctor; " the ob-
ject of my relation Pe's tenderest affection. He had
been ordered to repair to the camp of the Tartars,
and fearful of some unforeseen misfortune, he con-
fided his daughter to me, with a request to choose a
husband for her : chance having made me ac-
quainted with the talents and external advantages
of your brother, I thought that my niece and he
would make a well-assorted couple, and I therefore
put not a little ardour in my solicitations. I wished
to prove myself worthy of the confidence placed in
me by my relation. If it had concerned a person
of such ordinary merits as my own daughter, should
I dare to importune a wise man about so trifing a
10
JU-KIAO-LI
subject ? But since your brother has condescended
to think better of the affair, and that you, my dea
sir, are willing to give me your opinion about it, my
niece is still unmarried, and it is right that I should
again seize the handle of the hatchet. If two per-
sons so justly formed for each other should be
united, it will be allowed that what I have hereto-
fore said upon the subject was not devoid of rea-
son."
"My respectable master, we were entirely igno-
rant that the project you had formed, which
evinced so much kindness towards my brother,
was founded upon such generous motives. Our
conduct has been ridiculous in the extreme. If at
present you will benevolently finish what you have
begun, you will fill up the measure of your kind-
nesses; and it may be said of such an affection, that
it is as close as the union of the flesh and the
bones, and that it will last through life and death.
For the time to come, should my brother turn him-
self into a horse or a dog to serve you, it would
not repay the ten thousandth part of the benefits
you have heaped upon him."
Then, taking up the presents he had brought, he
made a profound bow. "These valueless trifles,"
continued he, 'are but very insufficient marks of my
sincere attachment. Your refusing them will be
the same as forbidding your disciple to cross the
threshold of your door. I venture to hope that you
will condescend to accept them as a pledge of re-
membrance."
.6 I ought not," replied Dr Gou, "to accept
such valuable marks of your courtesy; but since
you express towards me such affectionate senti-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
11
ments, I cannot refuse, though I blush to do it,
taking one or two of these presents :" and he chose
out four articles of different kinds. See Yeoute
renewed his entreaties; but Dr Gou positively re-
fused to accept of any more.
After tea had been brought in, Sse Yeoute rose up.
" I am troublesome to you," he said, " and I pre-
vent your recovery. I shall now go away, but per-
mit me to return another day to offer you my respects
and receive your orders."
" I ought to detain you, and profit by your con-
versation," said Dr Gou " but you will excuse me
on account of my health. Another day I shall
have the honour of your company to dinner." He
then led his guest to the door, who instantly de-
parted. As he implicitly believed everything that
had been told him, he flattered himself that the
good intentions which he had formerly entertained,
would now be realized. This thought gave him
great satisfaction.
Sse Yeoute on returning home, meditated with
great delight upon what had taken place. "This is
an affair," thought he, " that runs forward of itself.
Let me only get possession of a letter, and the im-
portant point shall soon be settled."
A few days after, a messenger from Dr Gou
came to him with two cards of invitation. "My
master," said the man, "requests both the mes-
sieurs Sse to come and dine with him in his garden
at noon precisely."
" Your master is too kind," eagerly replied Sse
Yeoute. "I shall certainly not fail to. comply with
his invitation, but my younger brother is in the coun-
try, reposing himself after the fatigues of study; it
12
JU-KIAO-LI:
is far from this, and I fear that he will not be able to
come."
The messenger went away, and at noon Sse
Yeoute arrived at the house of Dr Gou, who was
ready to receive him, and after the salutations
said-" It would be still better, if your brother
were here also."
Since my brother has become culpable in your
eyes, he has retired to the country, where he is en-
tirely occupied with domestic affairs. Now that he
has experienced so many proofs of your generosity,
shame prevents him from appearing in the city, or
frequenting his friends' houses. But should he ob-
tain through your kindness the object he desires, it
will be for him a favourable occasion to make his
acknowledgments to you."
Men of talent have their eccentricities; but
they inspire respect, even in those things in which
they act differently from the rest of mankind."
Dinner being served, the doctor and his guest
took their seats at the table, and continued to con-
verse together during the repast, which lasted until
the approach of night.
When Sse Yeoute expressed a wish to go away,
Dr Gou handed him a letter. " It would be fitting,"
he said, "that I should accompany you in your
route, but the orders of his majesty are imperative. I
must set out to-morrow or the day after. This
letter must be my substitute. When my relation
shall have read it, I have every reason to believe
that he will put no obstacle in the way of your
wishes. Watch for a favourable moment to pre-
sent it to him."
" In spite of every obstacle," said Sse Yeoute,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
13
"the jasper will be brought to perfection. My
respectable master, there are no terms sufficiently
strong to describe your goodness. When I shall
make known to my brother this joyful intelligence,
he ought to come and strike his forehead against
the threshold of your door." And so saying, he
tock the letter, and after having thanked his host
two or three times, he retired.
Some days after, Dr Gou finding his strength
returned, and his health re-established, set out for
the capital.
Sse Yeoute, having now obtained possession of
the letter, quitted the town that evening, and re-
turned home. Then he cautiously unfolded the
letter, and read what follows :-
" Gou Tiouian your humble relation has the
honour to offer his respects to the venerable lord
his brother-in-law, by laying this letter before his
seat.
" Immediately after our separation, I turned
my horse's head towards the north. But suddenly,
as I was about to quit the town, an accident inter-
rupted the farewell banquet that was offered to me.
A sudden sickness attacked my stomach, the effects
of which subjected me to more than one species of
danger. I have been sensibly affected by the va-
rious inquiries that you condescended to make
after me, and which were a proof to me of the ex-
cess of an affection close as the union of the flesh
and the bones. Now that I am happily recovered, I
mustrepair with all speed to the court. I have already
spoken to you with regard to marrying my niece to
a young man named Sse, whom I had met, and
whose real merit and shining qualities promise to
14
JU-KIAO-LI:
make him an accomplished son-in-law. For a
long time, my resolution had been fixed upon
this point. I had the subject mentioned to him
two or three times by means of a go-between ;
but as he is possessed of a firm and somewhat ob-
stinate character, he refused my proposals, and
thereby incurred my resentment. He is, my dear
brother-in-law, the same young man of whom I
spoke to you at our last meeting; he has now
quite suddenly repented of his refusal, and has of
his own accord addressed to me the most vehement
entreaties. This circumstance has filled me with-the
most unutterable joy, and the purport of this letter
is as it were to seize the handle of the hatchet, and
present him to you for the oriental bed You
have now, my dear brother-in-law, been a long time
exercising your extraordinary penetration in search
of a son-in-law. If, not judging my advice un-
worthy of your confidence, you introduce him into
your house+, the pavilion of the phenix will con-
tain a better assorted couple than it has ever had
before. A family formed under such happy auspices
will powerfully contribute to the consolation of
your old age, as well as the felicity of your daugh-
ter. Obliged to commence my journey without
delay, I beg you to excuse me if "for the mo-
ment I confine myself to the present private mis-
sive."
Sse Yeoute, on reading this letter a second time,
perceived that the writer had mentioned only the
young Sse without adding the sirname of Yeoupe.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
15
Delighted with the discovery, he said to himself
"My first idea was to find out some expedient that
would enable me to pass by the name of Sse Yeoupe ;
but since the letter makes no mention of this latter
name, why should I not present myself in my own
name ? Should any one recognise me, that will
prevent any suspicion being entertained; besides,
Dr Gou is about to repair to court; and he being
out of the way, who is there that I have to dread ?
Should I be fortunate enough to succeed, and con-
clude this affair, it will be of little consequence
should the truth be discovered, as I shall have no
reason to fear that they will attempt to undo what
has been done."
Having thus arranged his plan, he took care to
refold the letter, and give it the same appearance
that it had before.
He then ordered a certain number of presents to
be got ready, and having fixed upon a fortunate day,
he put on a dress of ceremony, and taking a nume-
rous retinue of servants along with him, set out
for the village of Kinchi, with a lofty and reso-
lute air.
In order to pass more completely for a well bred
man, he dismounted from his horse before arriving
at the lord Pe's, gate ; and having asked permission
from one of the inhabitants of the village to re-
pose himself for a moment in his house, he sent
before him one of his servants, with Dr Gou's
letter and one of his own visiting cards, ordering
him to give them to Toung, the porter of the
lord Pe.
The porter, on receiving the letter and card, im-
mediately carried them to his master. The lord Pe
16
JU-KIAO-LI :
was at that moment conversing with Tchangfanjou
in the pavilion of rural dreams. It will perhaps
be asked how it happened that Tchangfanjou was
still in the house after what had happened-after
Yansou had been informed of all that had taken
place by Sse Yeoupe, and had revealed it to her
young mistress. It must then be stated, that the
day the governor Yang was prevailed upon by the
lord Pe to remain and dine at the bottom of the
garden, the company amused themselves in writing
verses upon the agreeable objects by which they were
surrounded. The most fortunate chance favoured
Tchangfanjou upon this occasion. During Sse
Yeoupe's visits to him, they used sometimes to walk
in the garden, and on several of these occasions
Sse Yeoupe's lively imagination gave birth to some
pieces of poetry, which he left through carelessness
in Tchangfanjou's apartment. The latter appro-
priated them to himself, and on the day in ques-
tion made a very skilful use of them. The lord
Pe, who could have no suspicion of such knavery,
was profuse in his praise of each of these compo-
sitions, and immediately sent them to his daughter
to delight her. Houngiu, seeing that even after the
departure of Sse Yeoupe, Tchangfanjou still con-
tinyed to give proof of his poetical talents, began
to conceive some distrust of what she had heard
before, and therefore did not venture to speak to
her father about the tutor in the manner she had
first determined on. Thus Tchangfanjou, supported
by these additional proofs of his talent, maintained
his position in the house, where everything as yet ap-
peared to favour the accomplishment of his wishes.
The lord Pe was then in the midst of a conver-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
17
sation with Tchangfanjou, when the letter of the
lord Gou, his brother-in-law, was brought to him.
Pe opened it, and seeing at a glance its purport,
he remained for a moment divided between sur-
prise and satisfaction; but not wishing to explain
himself before Tchangfanjou, he put the letter into
his sleeve. He then took the visiting card, and
read these words: "Your very kumble and very
submissive disciple and servant, Sse Yeoute, has the
honour to offer you his respects."
Pe immediately rose, up and said to Tchangfan-
jou-" My relation Gou has given a letter of re-
commendation to one of his disciples for me; he is
here. I cannot defer going to receive him."
"Most undoubtedly," replied Tchanfanjou, who
instantly rose, took his leave, and returned to his
apartment behind the garden. Pe went to the
front part of the house, and sent a servant to re-
quest the lord Sse to come to him. On receiving
this invitation, Sse Yeoute changed his cloak and
cap, and came on foot to Pe's house. Pe, standing up
at the other end of the saloon, fixed hiseyes upon Sse
Yeoute, to see what kind of person he was, and per-
ceived that his clothes and head-dress were new
and curiously chosen. His deportment was free
and noble ; he had a very portly figure, and a
haughty countenance; but still the air rather of a
wealthy man, than a man of talent; his hale com-
plexion, red nose, and the aspect of his features,
spoke of wine and good cheer. He looked more
like an opulent lord than a man who had come to
ask a favour: his garments, covered with gold and
jasper, dazzled the sight. The folds of his robe
18
JU-KIAO-L1:
fell before him, and followed him behind; all his
merit was in the five externals.
On entering the saloon, Sse Yeoute presented the
card of ceremony to Pe, and was about paying
him a complete salutation. Pe refused repeatedly
to allow him; but at length yielding, he requested
Sse Yeoute to put off his outward garments (habit
de ville) before he made his obeisance. After the
salutations they sat down, having first gone
through the usual ceremonies. Pe then began the
conversation. " It is a long time ago," said he,
"since my relation Gou spoke to me in high terms
of praise of your rare merit, and inspired me with
a sincere esteem for you. Now that a fortunate
plant rises up to shed its benign influence upon my
roof, a sweet consolation reanimates my sentiments
benumbed by old age."
Sse Yeoute hastened to make a bow. I am,"
said he, "only a poor student, who have as yet
made but little progress. I have no capacity, and
my talent is of the very lowest order. But the lord
Gou has deigned to honour me with his notice, and
it is under his auspices that I have had the temerity
to present myself at the house of an excellent lord,
who is for me like the sacred mountain or the stars
of the north. I bow down my thoughts while I
raise up my eyes. Nothing can equal my trouble
and confusion."
"I am nothing more than an old man debili-
tated by years," replied Pe. "But I consider it a
most happy stroke of fortune to be allowed to see
a young man in the flower of his age, such as you,
and like unto jasper and precious stones." He
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
19
then asked his guest where he resided, and whe-
ther the paternal ash-tree, and the hemerocallis
,
were in a flourishing state.
"I have had the misfortune to lose my father,"
replied Sse Yeoute, "and have only my mother,
who is a widow. My habitation is seventeen or eigh-
teen miles + from this, at a place called Matchun."
Ah ! you live so near this," replied Pe. 'On
account of my age, I go but seldom abroad; but I
am not the less deeply struck by the brilliancy of a
mirror that is as clear as ice."
As they were conversing in this manner, the ser-
vants brought in tea. A short time after, Sse
Yeoute rose up to go away.
"After the trouble you have taken to come such
a distance to see me," said Pe, "I ought to offer
you a little collation; but I dare not at the com-
mencement of our acquaintance conduct myself in
a manner so little conformable to the rules of po-
liteness. You will permit me to choose a more
fortunate day on which to beg you to do me that
honour."
"The favours you have already heaped upon
me," replied Sse Yeoute, "have surpassed my ut-
most hopes. It would be an excess of ambition in
me to desire anything more."
He then made his bow and took leave. Pe ac-
companied him outside the great gates, and after
20
JU-KIAO-LI:
new demonstrations of courtesy, they separated.
The servants then displayed the presents which they
had brought. Pe chose out six sorts, which he ac-
cepted, and the remainder were taken away. The
extreme deference which Pe had shewn to Sse
Yeoute persuaded him that his affairs would pro-
ceed prosperously, and this assurance gave him
great satisfaction.
Pe had but just re-entered the interior apart-
ment when his daughter came to see him. " What
visits have you received to-day, father?" she eagerly
asked.
"The only visit," replied Pe, "that I have had
to-day has been that of a young man named Sse,
who brought a letter of recommendation from your
uncle relative to his marrying you;" and he took
doctor Gou's letter, and gave it to his daughter.
She received it, and, on throwing a look over it,
recognised the name of Sse. This delighted her,
as she was convinced that Sse Yeoupe was the per-
son meant; and her joy was increased by learning
that this same Sse Yeoupe was the young man whom
her uncle had formerly fixed upon to be her hus-
band. Full of this idea, she asked with great
earnestness, "And what is the sirname of this young
man? Does he really justify all that my uncle says
of him ?"
"His surname," replied Pe, " is Yeoute; it was
of him that your uncle spake to me some time ago,
as having gained the first place at the examinations
-a young man of talent and merit. He also praises
him very highly in this letter. I have myself just
seen him his appearance is prepossessing, and his
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
21
conversation not devoid of charm. But whether he
is possessed of great merit or not, I am not yet
perfectly sure."
" When her father named Sse Yeoute, Houngiu's
mind was preoccupied with the name of Sse Yeoupe,
so that she paid no attention to the difference; but,
a little surprised at her father's adding that he was
not yet perfectly sure that young Sse was a man of
great merit, she said, " When my uncle made choice
of this young man for your daughter, he did not
form his decision in the space between morning and
evening; he must have found something recom-
mendable in him: how comes it, father, that you
and my uncle are not of the same opinion upon this
point?"
"I have seen him only for a moment," replied
Pe, and it is possible that I have not penetrated
deep enough into his character. But I shall not
fail to invite him to dine another day, and then I
shall examine him with the most scrupulous atten-
tion. There is but one thing to remark: we have
Mr Tchang here still, with regard to whom I know
not well what to do."
" There must be no undue preference," replied
Houngiu; ' your choice, father, should be deter-
mined only by talents and accomplishments."
As to appearance," said Pe, "though young
Sse be not as perfect as the jewels of a crown, yet I
think he has the advantage of Tchang; but with
regard to talent, here are several pieces of poetry
written by young Tchang, which I have read with
great pleasure. Sse has in his favour only the
recommendation of your uncle: I have not yet put
him to the proof, and am therefore still undecided."
22
JU-KIAO-LI:
Houngiu, giving way to her reflections, thought to
herself that Sse and Tchang were as different from
each other as heaven from the abyss. How hap-
pened it that her father, so celebrated for his know-
ledge of men, could fall into such an error? There
must, no doubt, be a film over his eyes for the
moment: it was only necessary to see the two young
men together, to distinguish at once the jasper from
the pebble. Then addressing herself to Pe, she
said, " The waters of the King and the Wei do not
mingle together, and black can never be taken for
white. If you are still in doubt, father, what pre-
vents you from bringing these two suitors together
in the same room, and putting them to the proof,
by giving them a subject to write upon? By this
means you will succeed not only in discovering the
man of merit, and the man devoid of it; but after-
wards, when you shall have dismissed one, by giving
the preference to the other, neither of them can
have any cause to complain of you."
You are perfectly right," replied Pe. "To-mor-
row I shall send an invitation to young Sse, and
also request young Tchang to give me his com-
pany I shall this very moment seek for some rather
difficult subject upon which to try them : in this
manner we shall be able to ascertain upon which
side is strength or weakness."
When the wind and the rain come on at the same mo-
ment,
The swallows and the hawks fly together from the storm.
If the spring did not announce its reign by the return of
the leaves,
The moss, with its greenish tints, would find favour in
men's eyes.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
23
We shall leave the father and daughter occupied
in deliberating. Tchanfanjou, as is already known,
was on a footing of perfect intimacy with Pe's ser-
vants. The morning of the day that Sse Yeoute
came to make his proposal of marriage, one of the
household came immediately to inform Tchanfanjou
of it. This intelligence confounded him. Who is
this personage?' he asked.
The bearer of the news replied that he was a
bachelor of the college of Kinling, named Sse
Yeoute. On hearing these words, Tehanfanjou,
deceived by the similarity of the pronunciation, paid
no attention to the difference of the orthography,
and had no doubt but that it was Sse Yeoupe.
"The little coxcomb!" said he to himself. now
see why he went away without taking leave of me :
it was to go to doctor Gou, and get him to be his
mediator and write in his favour; and he must now
come and interrupt an affair almost concluded.
How odious he appears to be And though marriage
is my object, I am established here only as a guest,
and under a different pretext; while he comes
openly, and without any subterfuge, to make a pro-
posal of marriage. Should we be confronted, I shall
not be able to get the advantage of him: in per-
sonal appearance I am not superior to him; more-
over, my verses upon the vernal willows, and my
song upon the red-blossomed pear-tree, were writ-
ten by him. Should Pe have an hour's interview
with him, he will discover all that his proposal
will be accepted, and I shall be ruined, in spite of
all my resources. In order that things should fall
out according to my wishes, I must imagine some
expedient to drive him from the house."
24
JU-KIAO-LI:
After a moment's reflection, a thought struck him
_" This young Sse told me that doctor Gou had
offered him one of his daughters, whom he refused ;
and that the doctor conceived a great animosity
against him in consequence. How happens it then
that he should take an interest in bringing about
his marriage? There is something extraordinary
in all this."
He was in the midst of this incertitude when the
porter Tchoungyoung entered with a card of invita-
tion. "Sir," said the porter, "my master prays
you to come and dine with him to-morrow, to meet
young Mr Sse, who has arrived at Kinling."
"Your coming here at this moment, my friend,"
replied Tchanfanjou, " is most apropos: I have
something to ask you. What business brought this
Mr Sse to see your master yesterday?"
"Mr Sse," replied the porter, is a young man
whom the lord Gou, the uncle of Miss Pe, has sent
here to be married to her."
"And what fine qualities has the uncle of your
mistress discovered in this young man, to induce
him to recommend him in this manner?"
" It is a long story to tell. When my master was
at court, my young mistress came to pass some
time in the house of the lord her uncle : it was then
that the latter, who knew that young Mr Sse had
obtained the first place at the examinations, and
who besides had seen, I know not where, some
fine verses of his writing, wished that he should
marry Miss Pe; but Mr Sse refused, and the pro-
ject failed. I know not how it is, but within a short
time he has changed his mind ; and that is the rea-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
25
son that Miss Pe's uncle has given him the letter
of recommendation which he brought here."
Tchangfanjou smiled disdainfully, and said, " If
things are as you say, it was then a vain boast of
your master and his daughter to announce that their
choice should fall upon a man of talent only. All
that is necessary, is for a suitor to have the recom-
mendation of some high personage."
" What is that you say ?" replied the porter. " It
is because my master has found Mr Sse to be a man
of genuine talent, that he gives him the preference:
it was not a vain boast by any means."
" My old friend, how dull your eyes must be !
You have already seen the personage; it was he
who came with me the other day, and brought some
verses upon the vernal willows, which your master
and his daughter thought so little of and turned
into ridicule."
"He, Mr Tchang !" replied the porter. "Oh, I
recollect perfectly well the person who came with
you the day you mention; he was a well-made
man, but very young. But Mr Sse, of whom we are
now speaking, without being very old, is a strong
and vigorous man. He is certainly not the same."
" He is not the same person!" exclaimed Tchang-
fanjou, very much surprised. How happens it,
then, that he is also called Sse Yeoupe?"
"There is upon his card Sse Yeoute," replied the
porter.
"How does he write his sirname?" asked Tchang-
fanjou.
" There is," replied the porter, " Yeou, which
signifies to have ; and te, which means virtue."
Tchangfanjou heard this explanation with joy and
26
JU-KIAO-LI:
surprise. "This is very extraordinary," he ex-
claimed. " What ! there is still another?"
"Sir," said the porter, " you will meet him to-
morrow, and you will see how the matter is. You
have received a card of invitation: I must now
carry this card to Mr Sse;" and so saying, he laid
the card down and went away.
Tchangfanjou remained for a long time plunged
in reflection. If this be not Sse Yeoupe," said he,
" I am still firm upon the soles of my feet. recol-
lect that the person whom doctor Gou wished to
have married to his niece, was the student who ob-
tained the first place at the examinations; and
young Sse assured me that it was himself who had
gained that advantage: how then could this other
have asked for a letter of recommendation ? There
must be some trick under all this. To-morrow I
shall observe him at my leisure; I shall take to
pieces the most trifing expressions ; and if there be
any knavery in the business, he will find it not a
little difficult to hold himself upright." This idea
gave him some satisfaction.
In the mean time Toungyoung went to Matchun,
to the house of Mr Sse, with the card of invitation.
Sse Yeoute took the card, and kept the porter to
dine. " Will there be any company at your house
to-morrow ?" he asked.
" There will be only the lord Tchang, who lodges
in the mansion, and keeps my master company,"
replied the porter.
Sse Yeoute knew who Tchangfanjou was, and he
made no further inquiries. When the porter had
dined and returned thanks, he said, "To-morrow,
sir, do not fail, I beg of you, to come in good time :
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
27
it is a long distance hither, and you will spare me
the trouble of coming to seek you."
" I should be very sorry to give you that trouble,"
said Sse Yeoute; "I shall come early, you may be
sure."
The porter went away, and Sse Yeoute remained
floating betweeen incertitude and satisfaction.-
Should Tchangfanjou be even one of the genii, he
cannot see to the bottom of my project, and he will
never be able to suspect that I am well acquainted
with his manœuvres: should he become restive, I
shall completely unmask him, and reduce him to
such a pass that he shall have no place to hide
himself in."
The effect of the plan will be, that one will miss
the treasure he sought to find, and the other will
lose what he thought he had already made sure of.
Whilst the man prepares to kill the tiger,
The tiger thinks of devouring the man ;
But the struggle between the crab and the cormorant
Turns to the advantage of the fisherman."
The following chapter will shew what happened
the next day at the interview of these two per-
sonages.
28
JU-KIAO-LI:
CHAPTER XII.
FOLLY AT BAY FAILS ON THE VERY SPOT WHERE
IT WAS TO BE PUT TO THE PROOF.
" You boast of your prowess too soon, who have nothing to justify
your daring. Feeble champions, you depend too much upon the indif-
ference of heaven; because the mistakes of others have been for a time
favourable to you, you forget the mass of suspicion that is insensibly
augmenting. Once you are found out, a wall will rise up against your
wishes; and without their thinking of it, the spirit of harmony will bring
together those who ought to be united. The maxim of the sage has long
taught the art of knowing mankind; see upon what foundation they
stand, and what is the cause of their tranquillity."
THE next day, Pe, after having prepared every-
thing necessary for the dinner, came about the hour
of noon to request Tchangfanjou to accompany him
to the pavilion of rural dreams, that they might
enjoy the pleasure of conversation. Amongst other
things Tchangfanjou asked him if Mr Sse, the young
man who had the day before been recommended to
him by his brother-in-law, the lord Gou, was for-
merly known to him, or if he had but recently be-
come acquainted with him."
" He is not a very old acquaintance," replied Pe.
" When my brother-in-law went to the temple of
the Valley of Immortals, to enjoy the sight of the
plum-trees in blossom, he saw upon a wall some
verses written by this young man, which pleased him
very much: this was what first fixed his attention.
He afterwards learned that the lord Li, the examiner
of the college, had conferred upon him the first
place at the examination and this made him think
of marrying him to my daughter. Contrary to his
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
29
expectation, the young man listened only to himself,
and refused my brother-in-law's offer. Doctor Gou
became irritated, and complained to the lord Li,
who deprived young Sse of the place he had ob-
tained at the examination. My brother-in-law
informed me of these things on my return from
the capital I paid but little attention to the story,
and soon entirely forgot it. I know not how the
thing has happened, but within the last few days I
received a letter from my brother-in-law, in which
he informs me that the young man has changed his
mind: and he recommends him most earnestly
to me for a son-in-law. I saw him yesterday,
but I could not in an hour's time satisfy myself
as to his possessing great talents; so that I am still
in great doubt upon this subject. Nevertheless
I cannot, after my brother-in-law's letter, avoid
receiving him politely, and therefore I have invited
him to come and dine with us to-day. I must
claim the exercise of your talents, be it in verse or
prose, in order, during the intervals of the repast,
to make him speak. Should he not shew himself a
man of real merit, it will be a sufficient excuse for
me with my brother-in-law."
If such be the case," replied Tchangfanjou,
" you will easily see it with your own eyes: no
further examination will be necessary. But how
is the surname of this Mr Sse written in the letter of
the lord your relation?"
" The letter announces him only as Mr Sse,
without mentioning his surname. But by his visiting
card, which I saw yesterday, I learn that he calls
himself Sse Yeoute."
Tchangfanjou began to laugh, and remained
30
JU-KIAO-LI;
silent. "Master," said Pe to him, " what makes
you laugh ? Have you learned anything relative to
this young man?"
Tchangfanjou continued to laugh. " Whether
I have or have not learned anything, I beg your
lordship not to question me; for I cannot permit
myself to tell you anything. Your lordship is
possessed of penetration and information, and it is
only necessary for you to apply the powers of your
intellect to those things that come under your
observation."
" We are on intimate terms," said Pe. " What
is it then that prevents you from explaining your-
self clearly? If you will not tell what you know,
you must be withheld by some weighty reason."
Tchangfanjou assumed his usual expression of
countenance. "Why should you expect me to
explain myself?" said he. " I may have heard
something without being certain of its truth. If I
remain silent, it may be the cause of a misunder-
standing in a very important affair; and if I speak,
I run the risk of being thought a detractor. This
alone is the cause of my silence."
" Truth and falsehood are discussed in public,"
said Pe; " but here there can be no question of
detraction. Have the goodness, I pray you, to
acquaint me with the fact."
"Since your lordship insists," replied Tchang-
fanjou, " I can no longer refuse satisfying you.
What I have heard is, that the young Sse recom-
mended to you by the lord your relation, is certainly
a Sse, but not the same as the person who has
come here."
"I am endeavouring to recollect the surname
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
31
made use of by my relation, when speaking to me
of him. As well as I can recollect it was Yeoute.
Who can this other person of the name of Sse be ?"
" There is a similarity in the pronunciation,"
said Tchangfanjou ; " but they are written dif-
ferently. The person upon whom your relation's
choice fell, is Sse Yeoupe, and not Sse Yeoute."
" What ! there are two?" exclaimed Pe, in great
surprise. "Now that my brother-in-law has set
out for the court, how shall we be able to dis-
tinguish them ?"
" Without much difficulty: your lordship has
only to send to inquire if he who at the last exami-
nation obtained the first place, is called Sse Yeoupe
or Sse Yeoute ; that will clear up the matter."
" You are right," said Pe; and he immediately
sent one of his servants to verify the fact. At this
moment he was informed of the arrival of the
young lord Sse. Pe sent to request he would come
in. It was Tchangfanjou who first made an
obeisance to him; Pe then did him the same
honour; and the civilities being concluded, they sat
down in the order befitting guests and a master of
the house: Sse Yeoute on the left side, Tchang-
fanjou on the right, Pe also towards the right, and
a little lower down.
These preliminaries obliged them to converse
for some time only on indifferent subjects, till Pe,
addressing them, said, "My disposition leads
me to esteem talent above all other things.
Formerly, when I directed my steps towards
the court of the sovereign, I was continually
occupied in seeking for it, but my efforts were
fruitless. How happy am I now to be able to
32
JU-KIAO-LI:
bring together within the narrow precincts of this
house two sages such as you!"
Venerable master," replied Sse Yeoute, "your
words may be justly applied to the rare talents of
the lord Tchang; but as for me, your disciple, I
am unskilled in the great art of usurping a merit
foreign to me, and decking myself in the eyes of
men with brilliant qualities to which I have no title.
I have no intention of exhausting my powers in such
an undertaking; for I should dread, had I to erect
an edifice in common with the lord Tchang, to mix
vile materials with jasper and pearls."
"I am but a student of the humblest order," re-
plied Tchangfanjou, "and it was only the indul-
gence and extreme goodness of your lordship, which
could inspire me with confidence to come here and
assume a title and perform functions which honour
me*. Such is not the case with the lord Sse; he is
really destined to march at the head of and surpass
all his rivals; he is worthy in every way of the
preference that your lordship and your illustrious
brother-in-law may give him."
" You are both men of talent, gentlemen," said
Pe. "One of you is like the dragon that makes his
way through the clouds, and the other like the
stork that makes the meadows resound with his
melodious voice. Rivals worthy of each other,
and animated by a laudable emulation, if a prize
worthy of your merits were proposed to you, never,
I think, could it be said by which hand the stag fell
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
33
Let me turn my eyes to the right or to the left, I
am equally filled with the most unutterable respect."
The conversation continued for some time in
this tone, when the servants came to announce that
dinner was on the table. Pe invited his guests to
come and take their seats ; and as before, Sse Yeoute
was placed on the left, Tchangfanjou on the right,
and Pe at the lower end.
After the wine had been passed round several
times, Pe resumed the conversation. "Formerly,"
said he, "when the lord Li was at court, every one
pointed him out as a man whose merit gave great
hopes, and in consequence he was appointed exa-
miner-general of the province of Nanking. But
since he has been enabled to inscribe upon the list
names such as yours, Mr Sse, it may be said that
the hopes conceived of him were not ill founded."
"After the manner in which you speak of your
disciple," observed Sse Yeoute, " we might say that
you would take the eye of a fish for a pearl: I can
only dull the brilliancy of the mirror of our illustri-
ous master. But it may be said that he is the equal
of Kiahou in the art of discovering and rewarding
men of merit."
"Lord Sse," replied Tchanfanjou, you have
made yourself known from the very outset as a dis-
tinguished student; and if the lord examiner should
find many such in the course of his autumnal circuit,
it would shed a new lustre upon literature. But in
the present corruption of manners, the sun has
scarcely shone upon a man of real merit, but there
appears a shadow that follows him like the sprites
of the mountains or the demons of the rivers. It is
34
JU*KIAOLI:
scandalous that such abuses should take place, pro-
bably in open day and in the light of heaven."
Sse Yeoute felt the meaning of these expressions,
and was convinced that Tchangfanjou applied them
to him : he therefore replied, "Those who have
eyes can easily discover the persons of whom you
speak. But what is truly shameful, is to see a
class of wretches who pilfer the compositions of
others, and make them pass for their own, in order
to get access to the great and advance their fortune.
Even if possessed of only the smallest degree of
penetration, would it not be ridiculous to allow
one's-self to be the dupe of such frauds?"
"The things of which you speak," said Pe,
" may have happened, but infatuation is limited in
its duration, and cannot last long."
The conversation was carried on for some time in
this sharp tone, the two adversaries reciprocally aim-
ing concealed blows at each other. Pe listened with
attention, and noted all that he heard in his memory.
They had been a long time drinking, when the
servants came to clear the table. Pe invited his
two guests to accompany him to the pavilion of
rural dreams. After washing their hands, Tchang-
fanjou went to his own apartment at the bottom of
the garden to put on other clothes. Pe remained
alone with Sse Yeoute, and changed clothes in the
pavilion. They then amused themselves in looking
at a flowered arbour that stood opposite the stair-
case, and in reading some inscriptions that were
hung up against the walls of the pavilion. Amongst
the number were the verses upon the vernal wil-
lows, and the song upon the red-blossomed pear-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
35
tree, in the hand-writing of Tchangfanjou. When
Sse Yeoute came to these inscriptions, Pe, pointing
to them with his finger, said, "These are some
compositions of the lord Tchang, upon which I set
a great value; examine them a little, my dear sir,
and give me your opinion of them."
Sse Yeoute immediately complied; and seeing at
the first glance that they were the very same pieces
of poetry which had been written by Sse Yeoupe,
he began to laugh, and carelessly replied, "Yes,
they are fine verses."
Pe, seeing Sse Yeoute laugh, judged that he had
some motive for doing so, and questioned him, say-
ing, "I have requested you to let me know your
opinion. What you have just said is not all you
think: you are, sir, a man of rare acquirements ; if
you find any fault with these verses, I see nothing
to prevent you from telling it to me."
Sse Yeoute hastened to reply by a profound bow.
Your disciple could not permit himself to do such
a thing," said he; "these verses are perfectly fine
and ingenious, and nothing could be added to them.
What fault can I find with them ? But the fact is,
that " He here interrupted himself, and re-
mained silent.
" You will be kind enough to inform me," said
Pe, pressingly, " what it is you have on your mind;
no harm can result from your making me acquainted
with it."
'It is no great secret," replied Sse Yeoute; "but
the fact is, that I had already seen these verses."
" And where did you see them ?" asked Pe.
"One of my friends shewed them to me: he told
me that he had sent them to you in the second
36
JU-KIAO-LI:
moon of this spring, and that you, my respectable
master, had never acknowledged their receipt. In-
dignant at seeing that his talents had been of such
little service to him, he retired, a circumstance
that afflicted me not a little on his account. I have
no intention whatsoever to depreciate the trea-
sure that you possess; but how comes it that the
compositions of the lord Tchang are exactly the
same, word for word, as those of my friend ? This
is a most extraordinary thing."
Pe, very much astonished, said, " For the last
month I have seen no one here but the lord Tchang."
I suppose," said Sse Yeoute, "my friend came
here at the same time as the lord Tchang. You
have only, my respectable master, to examine the
lists kept at your gate."
" Who is the friend of whom you speak?" asked
Pe: but before Sse Yeoute had time to answer,
Tchangfanjou returned, after having changed his
clothes. Both remained silent on seeing him ap-
proach, until Pe begged his guests to take their
seats at table. After having drunk for some time
longer, Pe said to them, "Such poor entertainment
and so frugal a repast do but little honour to the
master of the house; but it would have been very
foolish in me, when chance brought together at my
board two illustrious literati of the province of
Nanking, to have let so fair an occasion escape. I
have a desire, gentlemen, to make choice of a sub-
ject upon which you may display your jasper and
pearls : I shall be most happy to witness the bril-
liant fruits of your poetical fervour."
Messieurs Tchang and Sse, entirely occupied in
regarding each other with looks of distrust and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
37
envy, after the cutting allusions they had recipro-
cally made use of, were confounded on hearing Pe
suddenly propose to them to write some verses.
" When your lordship condescends to lay your
commands upon me," replied Tchangfanjou, " it is
my custom to obey ; but 1 am not sure that the lord
Sse finds himself in the poetical vein at this moment."
" Being under the roof of your lordship, my most
excellent master," replied Sse, "it is natural that I
should comply with your request, even though the
offering I should present might be of the most ordi-
nary description; but at present, since you have
made us drink to excess, the wine has confused my
ideas, and I fear that I am in a state not by any
means fitted to receive your instructions."
" Truly," said Tchangfanjou, to take things in
this light, [ have drunk much more than you."
" A vase of wine gives birth to a hundred pieces
of poetry, and the cup of blue nenuphar is the source
of fine verses. With such distinguished talent as
you possess, gentlemen, there is no occasion for this
excess of modesty."
Pe then called his servants, and told them
to bring the four precious articles made use of by
men of letters *. A sheet of paper being placed
before each of his guests, Pe indicated the
subject, which was to celebrate the evening they
had passed together. ' Gentlemen," continued he,
after proposing the subject, " I leave to yourselves
the choice of the rhymes; but when you shall have
finished, I, in my turn, will compose a piece of
poetry upon the same rhymes. If I dictated to
38
JU-KIAO-LI:
you the final words, you might suppose I did it
with a view to my own triumph. What say you,
gentlemen?'
" With talents worthy of heaven, my respectable
master, how can you think of measuring yourself
with us ?" said both Messieurs Sse and Tchang at
the same time. But whilst their lips held this lan-
guage, their hearts were sinking for very fear within
them. They sat trembling all over, and could not
remain quiet for a moment. It became equally im-
possible for them to write, or to answer that they
did not wish to write. They turned from the right
to the left, uttering inarticulate sounds. Sse Yeoute
excused himself particularly on account of drunken-
ness; 'I changfanjou pretended to be in a profound
reverie. Pe, seeing that the affairs of his guests
were in a sad plight, rose up. " Gentlemen," said
he, "I shall leave you for a moment I fear that I
interrupt your poetical meditations." And he went
out and placed himself behind the pavilion.
Imposture can scarcely endure through a day;
Suspicion is not long in penetrating it.
He who risks himself upon an open stage,
Must soon have his defects discovered.
The sun was now beginning to verge towards the
west. Tchang and Sse, placed face to face, threw
furtive and angry glances at each other: no strata-
gem could now help them, and they had but little
liking to take counsel from each other. After a
moment of confusion, Sse Yeoute rose up, descended
to the foot of the staircase, and leaned upon some
trellis-work, pretending to be seriously indisposed.
Tchangfanjou, pretending a cramp in the stomach,
retired to his own apartment, and did not return for
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
39
a considerable time. Pe, concealed behind the pa-
vilion, observed what had taken place. Though
feeling resentment and indignation at the conduct
of these two personages, he could scarcely refrain
from laughter. Judging it proper however not to
push to an extremity this humiliating ordeal, he
determined to return to his guests, and relieve them
from this embarrassment. He ordered some hot
wine, and requested these gentlemen to resume
their seats at table. Being thus invited, they could
not refuse, but seated themselves. " Gentlemen,"
said Pe to them, "have you written your verses?"
Tchangfanjou, pushing impudence to the last de-
gree, took care not to mention that he had not com-
menced them. "I had nearly half finished mine,"
said he, "when I was attacked by a most acute
pain. There are still some rhymes wanting to com-
plete the task."
Sse Yeoute, imitating the effrontery of Tchang,
also replied - " I had determined to finish my
poem, but after the overflowing cups you have
poured out to us, the meadow is still too much in-
undated. As there are still a few defects in the
composition I dare not present it to you."
" As you have made a beginning, gentlemen,"
said Pe, "the rest of the evening must not be lost.
I trust that the ardour of composition has not dis-
abled you from replying to my pledges. Another
day I shall receive your instructions. I see the hot
wine is ready let us deeply drink, to fill up the
measure of our joy."
When Sse and Tchang heard him say that they
might finish their compositions another day, they
began to take courage. " If 1 had been asked to
40
JU-KIAO-LI
continue writing," said Sse Yeoute, I might still
do so much violence to myself; but to drink any
more is quite impossible."
A good drinker is often a wretched poet," ob-
served Tchangfanjou. "I am not in the habit of
allowing myself to be overcome in this way, as my
lord Pe very well knows. This day's excess has
already very much incommoded me, and my poetic
fire is completely extinguished. I am not in a state
to fulfil my duty towards our host. My lord Sse,
what can I do
" Having but such poor liquor to offer you, I
must not insist. But as it is still early, I must pro-
fit to the very last moment by the advantage of your
presence."
If there had been no consideration but that of
drinking, the two guests might still have very safely
emptied two more pitchers; but as they had so
repeatedly alleged that as an excuse for not
writing, they thought it prudent not to accept as
much as they were capable of containing. After a
few cups, the day beginning to close, Sse Yeoute
rose up to take leave. Pe, though pretending to
wish to detain him, rose up also, and accompanied
him to the gate. He afterwards separated from
Tchangfanjou, who returned to the library, while he
himself retired to his own apartment.
Truth is like a fine-flavoured wine,
While imposture resembles an insipid beverage.
Shew respect to true merit,
And treat with indifference men without talent.
When Pe entered his apartment, he found his
daughter there waiting for him. "My child," said
he, have seen to-day the manœuvres of Tchang
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
41
and Sse your suspicions both of one and the other
were not ill founded. We have very narrowly es-
caped becoming their dupe."
This intelligence gave Houngiu some surprise.
" As for Tchang," said she to herself, "there were
some grounds for suspicion ; but with regard to Sae,
what could have given rise to it ? What" conti-
nued she, "have you been able to discover, fa-
ther?"
"I recollected that your uncle had told me that
young Sse had obtained the first place at the ex-
amination. Well, Tchang informed me that he who
had got that place was Sse Yeoupe, and not the
person who was here."
"But, father, did you not tell me yesterday, that
this young man was Sse Yeoupe?"
He calls himself Sse Yeoute. The names re-
semble each other-but he is not the person first
cause of suspicion. I pointed out to Sse Yeoute the
verses and song of young Tchang, when he told me
that they were written by one of his intimate
friends, and that they did not contain a single word
belonging to Tchang;-is not this a second cause for
suspicion I then gave them both a subject to
write upon, but they excused themselves on ac-
count of drunkenness and indisposition; in fine,
under the most ignoble pretexts, they avoided wri-
ting a single word during the whole of the time
since dinner. They are two knavish usurpers of re-
putation."
The young maiden was for a moment mute with
astonishment. At length she said, 'If such be the
case, it is very fortunate, father, that you bestowed
so much attention upon this examination, for other-
42
JU-KIAO-LI:
wise we should have fallen into their snares.
I
do
not see how we could have escaped them."
" I have sent a person to the college," replied
Pe ; "and to-morrow we shall know the truth."
The father and daughter remained conversing in
this manner some time longer, after which they re-
tired to their respective apartments. The next
morning, when Pe had finished dressing, he went
and seated himself in a hall, and ordered Toung-
young to appear before him. 'About two months
ago," said he to him, " a young lord left some
verses upon the vernal willows for me. How hap-
pens it that you did not bring them to me ?"
"I am charged with keeping the gate," replied
Toungyoung: when letters, books, poetry or prose,
are left with me, that moment I bring them to you.
How could I permit myself to do otherwise ?"
" It was," said Pe, " a young man who came
here at the same time as the lord Tchang."
Toungyoung had from the commencement been
very culpable in this affair; and finding himself now
unexpectedly questioned upon the subject, he be-
came confounded; and his excuses and change of
countenance betrayed the confusion of his mind.
He at length said-" If it was at the same time
as the lord Tchang, I do recollect that a gentleman
came along with him; and I gave to your lord-
ship the two pieces of poetry that he left for
you."
" What was the family name of the gentleman? ?"
asked Pe.
"It is now a long while since that time," said
Toungyoung, "and at the moment I paid but little
attention to the matter."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
43
" Let me see the registries of the gate for these
last two months," said Pe.
On being ordered to bring in the registries of the
gate, Toungyoung ran out in great haste; but Pe,
remarking his embarrassment and precipitation, had
him called back. Do not you go," said he; and
he ordered another servant to go to the porter's
lodge, and bring the registries. The servant went,
and finding a great number of registries, he put them
under his arm, and brought them to his master.
Whilst Pe was looking over the registry of the
second moon, Toungyoung hastily put some of the
others aside. Pe, in going over the one he held, dis-
covered that the young man who had come at the
same time as Tchangfanjou, was called Sse Yeoupe.
Endeavouring to recall the details of the affair,
" I now," said he, "recollect that a young man of
the name of Sse sent me some verses, which I
thought perfectly ridiculous. How could he ever
have passed for a distinguished student ? He
throws great uncertainty upon the matter." Then,
continuing to question the porter, he said, " When-
ever a name is inscribed upon the register, the
country of the person leaving it should also be
noted down. Why has not Sse Yeoupe's country
been written under his name?"
" I suppose," said the porter, "that as it was
merely that of a traveller, whose visit you did not
receive, it was neglected as unnecessary."
" Even in the case of a traveller," replied Pe,
" the place from whence he comes should always be
noted do wn."
Probably it was written upon his visiting card,"
said the porter.
44
JU-KIAO-LI :
Shew me that card," said Pe.
" As the card was not of much importance," re-
plied the porter, "I fear that it may have been
mislaid since that time. Permit me to seek for it at
my leisure."
Pe, having observed that the porter had put under
his arm the other registries, and that there were be-
tween the leaves a great number of visiting cards
huddled together, ordered him to let him see them
immediately. "These cards," said the porter, " are
all of a recent date: there are none of the old ones
amongst them."
This confusion and unwillingness to shew the
cards, made Pe more anxious to see them and in
despite of his obstinacy, Toungyoung was forced
to produce them. Now this man was a drunkard,
and of a careless and inattentive disposition. He
had at the time of Sse's visit put the first two pieces
of poetry into an old registry, where he forgot
them; and being now called upon so suddenly to
produce the registry, he had no time to remove the
pieces of poetry, which was the cause of his present
embarrassment. Pe, conjecturing there was some-
thing extraordinary in all this, examined the regis-
try with great attention, and found between the
leaves the two pieces of poetry, the envelopes of
which had not yet been opened. Upon one of
those was written the name of the person who had
sent it, Tchangfanjou; upon the other that of Sse
Yeoupe. Pe opened them, and at the first glance
became convinced that Sse Yeoupe's piece of poe-
try was that which had been presented to him
under the name of Tchangfanjou; and that the
composition of the latter was that which had made
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
45
them laugh so much. On discovering this, Pe fell
into a violent passion, and fixing his eyes upon
the porter, said-" What is the meaning of all
this ?"
Toungyoung, seeing that the two pieces of poetry
were discovered, was struck with terror; and in-
stantly falling on his knees, he prostrated him-
self with his face against the ground. Pe, ex-
tremely irritated, began to reprimand him most
severely.
"So then, miserable slave," said he, this ex-
change has been the work of thy knavery, and it
has nearly led me into an error in one of the most
important of affairs !"
"Should I have ever of myself dared to do such
a thing?" said the porter. "No, it is the lord
Tchang's doing; it was he that directed me. I should
not have listened to him; I ought to have preferred
death."
Pe, becoming still more angry, ordered his ser-
vants to seize Toungyoung, and give him twenty
blows of the cudgel. He afterwards turned him
away, and put another porter in his place.
The commission of an evil action
Gives birth to misfortunes that will be one day its just
punishment.
After having caused the porter to be punished,
Pe questioned the servant whom he had sent to in-
quire the name of the person who had obtained the
first place at the examinations. The man answered him
in the following terms: "I have been to the college.
The student who obtained the first place was Sse
Yeoupe, and not Sse Yeoute. The latter, who is the
46
JU-KIAO-LI
sixty-fourth of the third class, has never had a
degree."
"Is this statement perfectly accurate ?" asked
Pe.
"I saw the list in the college," replied the ser-
vant :" nothing can be more certain."
As soon as Pe learned these facts, he went to ac-
quaint his daughter with them, and at the same time
shewed her the two pieces of poetry. " Is it possible
that there are in the world two such wretches?" he
exclaimed. "And was there ever so extraordinary
an adventure? Had it not been for the caution I
made use of on this occasion, my child, we should
have been led into an error in this the most impor-
tant circumstance of your whole life."
" If things go on in this way," replied Houngiu,
" men, indeed, are very much to be feared. I see
how difficult it is to escape danger in the unmarried
state. It is not without good reason that the first
of our classical books bestows so honourable a
classification upon her who refrains from entering
any engagement during ten years
" These two brutes, Tchang and Sse, gave them-
selves out impudently for what they were not. They
are shameless wretches. But now that their ma-
chinations are discovered, let us talk no more of
them. It is now certain that he who obtained the
first place at the examination is Sse Yeoupe ; that
he whom your uncle recommended is Sse Yeoupe ;
and that he who composed the two pieces of verse
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
47
upon the vernal willows is Sse Yeoupe. It is
therefore evident, that Sse Yeoupe must be a young
man full of accomplishments and merit. I at pre-
sent see no reason whatever to doubt it. But it
unfortunately happens that he is not here, and we
know not whither the storm may have blown him
at this moment. This is a most thwarting circum-
stance."
"Since this young man has so much cleverness,"
said Houngiu, " I do not suppose that he has
allowed himself to fall into an abyss besides, he
has been here already with his verses upon the
present rhymes, and he cannot have entirely for-
gotten the circumstance. Although he did not
present himself in person to you, yet a true poet
knows well what he is about. He is probably not
far off. Should he learn that the evil designs of
these two men have proved abortive, he will cer-
tainly reappear. But the first thing necessary to
be done is to get rid of these two knaves, Tchang
and Sse, and their almost incredible stratagems."
" That will be easy enough," said Pe. " We
have not entered upon the subject at all with Sse
Yeoute ; and as for Tchangfanjou, who is lodged
here, all that is necessary is to thank him, and
break off any further negotiation."
" It is a very good way," said Houngiu; " but I
fear, after the disposition they have shewn, that
they will return to the charge."
" Now that I am on my guard, you need have no
fears upon that head. But another thing occurs to
me: your uncle told me that after the project of
marriage had failed, he caused young Sse to be
deprived of the rank he had obtained; I know not
48
JU-KIAO-LI:
if he has been restored to it. The time for the pro-
vincial examination approaches; and should he not
be yet reinstituted, he would find himself in no
trifing embarrassment I shall send immediately
to inquire about this; it is rendering him a service ;
besides we may by that means learn the place of
his retreat."
"Thatisanexcellentidea father, 'replied Houngiu.
Pe sent immediately an intelligent servant to
Kinling, to ascertain the fact. He was absent
three or four days, and on his return gave this
account. " I inquired what had become of the
young lord Sse's promotion, and was informed
that the lord Gou had engaged the principal of the
college to restore him his degree but soon after
he had been deprived of it, an uncle of this young
lord, who is in the employment of government,
sent for him to accompany him to court; and he
has not returned since. I also heard that for
some months back they could not tell where he
was ; that his uncle, who wished to take him to the
capital, had not been able to meet him. I made
inquiries also at his lodgings, where I was told the
same thing. So that it would appear the intelligence
is perfectly true."
Pe paused a moment to reflect, and then said to
his daughter, " Since he has been restored to his
degree, he will come back of his own accord about
the time of the provincial examination. There is
therefore no reason to be alarmed."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
49
An error of the thickness of a hair
Leads you a hundred miles from the goal.
The opportunity once missed,
Disappointments start up in crowds before you.
Pe, after allowing some days to elapse, made
preparations for replying to the politeness of Sse
Yeoute ; and as he knew that Dr Gou was from
home, he wrote him a letter containing a refusal of
the proposed marriage. Sse Yeoute, on seeing all
his snares broken through, felt in himself sufficient
confusion to prevent him from renewing his im-
portunities. With regard to Tchangfanjou, some-
body having informed him of what had happened
to Toungyoung, he began to fear for his own safety;
and after consulting Wangwenhiang, he resolved
to take advantage of the approach of the provincial
examination, and to pretend that he should be
obliged in consequence to return to the capital to
prepare himself by a course of severe study. Pe
allowed him to launch his bark upon the current,
and took very good care to make no effort to de-
tain him.
Tchangfanjou and Sse Yeoute thus threw away
all the trouble they had given themselves to attain
their ends. But Pe, who had brooded over these
crosses, at length fell sick, and was obliged to
keep his bed. His afflicted daughter became a
prey to continual alarms : her sole occupation
was consulting doctors, and making her father take
the remedies they prescribed. She interrogated
the destinies, offered up her prayers to the gods; a
thousand various cares incessently absorbed her ;
she no longer put off her girdle, but passed her
days and nights in weeping and moaning. This
50
JU-KIAO-LI:
continued during a month, at the end of which the
patient began to recover his health.
Whilst Pe was thus confined to his house by
illness, Sse Yeoupe, after having taken leave of Sse
Yeoute and crossed the great river, was proceeding
along the road to the north. His mind was intent
upon only one idea-that of seeing Dr Gou. He
travelled with speed during entire days without
being conscious of fatigue.
One day he arrived at a little town of the pro-
vince of Chantoung, which is called Tseou : as the
sun was going to set, he looked about for an inn to
stop at, and the next morning he rose at an early
hour. As Siaohi was getting together the baggage,
he found at the head of the bed a white linen sack,
that appeared to contain something, which he has-
tened to take to his master. The latter opened it,
and found that it contained four large parcels of
silver, amounting to more than a hundred pieces.
On seeing this, Sse Yeoupe immediately tied up
the sack again, and after a moment's reflection,
said to Siaohi, " This money belongs undoubtedly
to some traveller who slept here the night before
last, and left it behind him. If this be the case,
I ought to wait till he comes back to seek it, and
restore it to him : such would be the conduct of
an honest man. But my thoughts fly with the
rapidity of an arrow-I cannot endure the idea of
Josing a quarter of an hour, and much less of re-
maining here so it is better to place it in the
hands of the innkeeper with an injunction to restore
it to the owner."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
51
"
My lord," said Siaohi, " you are wrong.
There may, by possibility, be still some honest per-
sons in the world; but if after our departure the
innkeeper should not restore it, where can the
owner seek for redress It is true the unfortunate
man will be indebted to you for a good intention;
but if you wish to put it in execution, and merit
the protection of heaven, the only way is to stop
here at least for half a day."
" You are right," said Sse Yeoupe. It will
retard the moment of my arrival, but that cannot
now be helped."
When he had finished dressing and had eaten
his breakfast, the innkeeper was going to get his
horse ready. "Do not hurry yourself," said Sse;
"I must wait for some one here, and shall not
set out till the afternoon."
" If you are waiting for any one," replied the
imnkeeper, " you would do well to remain till to-
morrow."
Sse Yeoupe had determined to wait, but still he
felt not the less impatient. He walked about the
hall of the inn, went out, and came in. Towards
noon, and just after he had dined, he saw a man
in a blue dress, with a large cap upon his head,
who had the appearance of a government courier.
This man was on horseback, and came galloping
along at such a rate that he seemed to fly; he
stopped at the inn door, and dismounting from his
horse, with a bewildered air cried out, " Where is
the innkeeper?"
The master of the house came out to him. Mr
courier," said he, " it was you who passed by here
yesterday; what brings you back to-day?
52
JU KIAO-LI:
" A bad business," said the courier, "and one
which may prove so for all of you. I am the courier
of the tribunal, and am charged with despatches from
the lord the criminal judge. On arriving at Tseou, I
received a hundred and twenty ounces of silver
belonging to the public treasury, to be employed in
repairing the tombs and yesterday, as I was set-
ting out in haste, I left them behind me in your inn:
if any part of the money is missing, all your lives
are in jeopardy."
The innkeeper, alarmed at what he had heard,
said, Why come you here to trouble me and my
guests? A thousand persons come into the inn,
ten thousand go out of it-if you neglect your own
business, why should that concern me?
"I have no time to talk to you," replied the cou-
rier : let us instantly go and see if we can find
anything."
They both entered hastily the room, and going to
the bed, shook it and turned it upside down; but
to no purpose, as may be easily conceived. The
courier, seeing that his money had disappeared,
lost all patience, and seizing the innkeeper with one
of his hands, said, It is in your house the money
has been lost, and you must be accountable for it.
You must come along with me."
" When you came here," replied the innkeeper,
66 you did not tell me that you had money about
you ; when you went away, you left none with me
to keep. What colour is your money ? You came
here empty-handed, and you will go away in the
same way, Why do you come here to insult me in
the face of heaven and earth?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
53
"I am one of those employed by the government
of the district," said the courier. " I had four par-
cels of silver, each containing thirty ounces; there
were in all one hundred and twenty ounces, which
I put in a white linen sack, and tied round my loins.
The night before last I took it off, and put it under
the straw at the head of the bed. I have here my
commission: you will perhaps be convinced that I
do not impose upon you;" and so saying he drew
from his sleeve a sheet of paper written upon with
red ink, and handed it to the innkeeper. 'Is this
a forgery?" said he. 'If you do not come along
with me, I shall go to the city and denounce
you." He then pushed the innkeeper outside the
door, and began dragging him forward, the latter
crying aloud in a great rage, " I am insulted-I
am outraged!"
Sse Yeoupe, now well convinced of the truth of
the matter, hastened to place himself before them,
and obliged them to stop. "Let him go instantly,"
said he; "there is no occasion for all this violence.
I have found the money, and it is forthcoming."
He then made Siaohi bring him the silver, which he
put into the hands of the courier.
On the money being thus recovered, the courier
and the innkeeper lost no time in returning their
thanks and compliments to Sse Yeoupe. "It would
be difficult to meet any one else who would have
the same goodness," said they. "Had the money
fallen into the hands of a person who would have
taken it away, all our lives would have been but of
little value."
It is money belonging to the government," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe. "What thanks do you owe me?
54
JU-KIAO-LI:
See only, I beg of you, if the amount be correct,
for I am very anxious to set out."
" You have rendered me an important service,"
said the courier. "How can I shew my gratitude
for it? I beg of you, sir, to stop for half a quarter
of an hour, and partake of a little collation as a
testimony of my respect."
" Some very pressing business requires my pre-
sence in the capital," said Sse Yeoupe. "Wishing
to restore you your money, I had no other way left
but to wait for you here. Now that I have put you
in possession of what belongs to you, I wish to set
out immediately. I really have not time to receive
the testimonies of your affection."
' Drink, I pray you," said the innkeeper, 'a
cup of wine with us. There is nothing here pre-
cious enough for you. But it is now very late;
you will not be able to travel far, and besides the
road is not safe. It will be more prudent to set out
to-morrow at an early hour."
"I am only a student," said Sse Yeoupe, "and
my baggage consists only of the most indispensable
articles. I have no object of value about me. Why
therefore should I be afraid?"
" Your not having any object of value, is no
reason why you should not be molested," said the
innkeeper.
Sse Yeoupe persisting in his intention to depart,
the innkeeper was obliged, though reluctantly, to
place his baggage upon the back of his horse.
Sse Yeoupe told Siaohi to settle the bill with him,
and then quitted the inn; the courier and the inn-
keeper renewed their thanks and good wishes, and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
55
accompanied him to his horse, which he mounted
and then rode off.
A lost treasure is restored to its owner
It would have been useless to have demanded its restitu-
tion from any other traveller.
Do not say that this young man does not understand
business,
He is more surely on the road to wealth than you would
suppose.
The courier having regained possession of his
money,. went away about his own business. As for
Sse Yeoupe, he urged his horse towards the north.
He had not gone above ten miles *, when suddenly
a furious wind arose, the heavens became obscured,
and the clouds, gathering together from all parts,
seemed to announce rain.
Sse Yeoupe then found himself not a little em-
barrassed where to find a shelter. For on looking
to each side of the road, he could see nothing but
a grove of willows and a vast heath, without a sin-
gle habitation.
In this state of uncertainty, he was about spurring
his horse, when a great lusty fellow, armed with a
bludgeon, rushed from out a thicket upon him, and
without saying a single word, struck him a violent
blow on the head. Sse Yeoupe could only say,
"I am lost," when he fell senseless from his horse,
and measured his length on the ground. The rob-
ber, seizing the favourable moment, vaulted upon
the horse, and by two or three blows of the blud-
geon upon the flank made him dart forward as if
56
JU-KIAO-LI
he had wings, and was soon out of sight in the
grove of willows.
Siaohi, who was at some distance behind, ran up
to assist his master to rise. The robber had car-
ried away the baggage along with the horse, and it
was impossible to say whither he had gone. Sse
Yeoupe, having got up, was happy to perceive that
he had received no injury in his fall ; but he had no
longer either horse or baggage. The master and
the servant looked at each other, having nothing else
to do but to bewail their misfortune.
We had made up our minds to the fatigues of a journey,
When behold a brigand comes to add to our misery.
The season of happiness is not yet at hand :
What a misfortune is such a rencontre !
Sse Yeoupe now found it equally difficult to
go forward or retrace his steps. In the next chap-
ter will be seen how he relieved himself from this
situation.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
57
CHAPTER XIII.
THE TALENT OF THE YOUNG BACHELOR ENA-
BLES HIM TO SURMOUNT THE OBSTACLES TO
HIS JOURNEY.
" Let it not be said that literature is a feeble resource against hun-
ger. A time comes when skill in the use of the pencil may be turned
to advantage. Some rich lord will pay the reward due to talent.
Sumptuous cheer in a splendid saloon shall be offered to him. The
resources of a scholar are more abundant than is generally thought.
A fragile instrument becomes in his hand the source of profit. Touched
with love, another fair one will take an interest in his success at the
autumnal examination. And until death she will entertain for the poet
the sentiments with which a single piece of his poetry had inspired her."
SSE Yeoupe, thus plundered in the midst of a desert
country, having neither horse nor baggage, alone
and destitute of everything, and that at a time
when the heavens were becoming every instant
more threatening, said to Siaohi, " The end of our
journey is still a great way off. Even could we has-
ten forward, we should now scarcely reach a shel-
ter in time. Here we both are pillaged, and without
money to continue our route. Where is the inn-
keeper that would wish to receive us ? The best we
can do is to return to the last inn we were at, and
to make some stay there."
'In the present posture of affairs, that is the
only thing we can do," said Siaohi; and offering his
arm to Sse Yeoupe, he assisted him in retracing the
road they had before travelled. When they had
set out, Sse Yeoupe was full of ardour and impa-
tience; but in returning he was devoid of strength
58
JU-K1AO-LI:
and courage. Having no horse, and being scarcely
able to walk, he did not reach the inn till it was
very late, and after the lanterns had been lighted.
The innkeeper, very much surprised at seeing him,
said, "Well, sir, what has brought you back? Have
you met with any accident?"
Sse Yeoupe told him how he had been robbed.
The innkeeper stamped with his feet. "I strongly
recommended you not to go. You were not willing
to listen to me, and now there are your horse and
baggage lost. What a deplorable event !"
" As to my baggage," replied Sse Yeoupe, " I
had but very little, and it is no great cause of com-
plaint. But after the misfortune that has hap-
pened to me on the road, and destitute as I
now am of everything, how can [ pursue my
journey ?"
"Sir," said the innkeeper, "come in, I pray
you, and take your supper. I shall get ready for
you the bed you slept in before; you will pass the
night here, and in the morning you will see what
you can do somewhere else."
Sse Yeoupe accepted the proposal. He passed
the night in the inn, and having risen early the next
morning, he was consulting in the hall with the
master of the house, when an old man with a white
beard appeared at the door and came towards them.
It. seems to me," said he, "that this is the
young lord who yesterday restored the courier his
money. He had set out on his journey : why has
he returned ?"
" Why should such great crimes be committed
in the empire?" said the innkeeper. "This young
lord, having found yesterday one hundred and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
59
twenty ounces of silver, had probity enough to re-
store them to the owner. Who could have thought
that heaven would have shut its eyes upon such
conduct, and that the same young lord would have
been afterwards robbed of his horse and baggage
on the road ? He is now destitute of everything,
and as much at a loss how to return as to go for-
ward."
"If such be the case," said the old man, " it is
a good action very badly recompensed. Per-
mit me, sir, to ask you your family name, the
place of your birth, and the place to which you are
going."
" My family name is Sse," replied Sse Yeoupe.
" We are natives of Kinling, and I was going to
the capital to see a person of my acquaintance. I
little thought I should have met with the misfortune
that has befallen ine. The money for the expense
of my journey is all lost. What should you advise
me to do, sir ?"
My lord Sse, since such is your name," said
the old man, "it is but eight or nine days' journey
from hence to the capital, and the expense of
such a journey cannot be very considerable. But
it would require more to replace your baggage,
and support you during your stay at court."
"There is no necessity for so much expense,"
replied Sse Yeoupe " I want but a few things for
my journey, a few trifles for my baggage. If I
had ten ounces, they would enable me to reach
the capital; and once there, I should find other re-
sources."
"This gentleman has rendered me an important
service," said the innkeeper. " I ought to lend him
60
JU-KIAO-LI:
these ten ounces of silver; but I am a poor man,
and could not make up the sum in so short a time.
If you have so much, my lord Tchang, and if
you will be kind enough to lend them to Mr Sse
for his journey, I shall endeavour to put some
ounces aside from time to time, and 1 will re-
turn them to you without your suffering the least
loss."
"I see," said old Tchang, that the lord Sse is
a man of merit and probity. He is besides a na-
tive of Nanking, and he should therefore possess
distinguished literary talents. If by chance he
should excel in poetry, I could point out a way
to find what he is in want of."
I am not possessed of distinguished literary
talents," replied Sse Yeoupe. "But as to poetry,
it is the amusement of all my evenings. If that can
be turned to any account, I beg of you to render
me that service."
"This is excellent," exclaimed old Tchang. "I
have a relation of the name of Li, a very rich man,
and who has been recently elevated to the dignity
of counsellor He is particularly anxious to be
on good terms with the principal magistrates. A
few days ago, the judge of the province t arrived
my relation, whom he received with great kindness,
wished to offer him some considerable presents,
but the judge disinterestedly refused to accept
them. But my relation, still desirous of shewing
him some mark of consideration, has thought of
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
61
sending him a skreen covered with silk, and on
which he will have four handsome subjects painted
by some skilful artist. He would also wish to add
four poetical explanations of these subjects by some
scholar of note, SO that the eight folds of the
skreen might be filled up. If you, my lord Sse,
would exert your rare talents in the composition
of these verses, it would be easy to procure you the
money necessary for your journey."
" It is not very difficult to write verses," said Sse
Yeoupe. "But is it because there are no men of
distinguished talent amongst the inhabitants of a
town which is the native place of literature, that
you are obliged to have recourse to me?"
" Not to tell you an untruth, my lord Sse," re-
plied old Tchang, "there is no lack of scholars in
the province of Chantoung * ; but I know none
who, after they have got places under government,
devote their leisure to the study of ancient litera-
ture, and the culture of poetry. The only one ca-
pable of writing verses is a certain licentiate Tsian;
but he is a man full of self-love and vanity, and
from whom it is very difficult to get anything. This
last spring, my relation had requested him to write
some verses upon the anniversary of the sub-pre-
fect's birth-day. He invited him three times to
dinner, and made him presents to the amount of
twenty or thirty ounces t; but all this was not
enough-he is continually coming to borrow, now
one thing, then another. Lately my relation applied
to him to write these four pieces of poetry, which
62
JU-KIAO-LI:
he promised to do as soon as he should find him-
self in a moment of poetical fervour. He puts off
from day to day my relation, who is continually
inviting him to his table, but as yet nothing has
come of it. If you, my lord Sse, could compose
these verses, you would relieve my relation from all
the trouble he has with this personage."
" If this be the case," said Sse Yeoupe, " it is
easy to render this service to the gentleman your
relation; but I am very anxious to continue my
journey : if I write these verses to-day, I should
wish to set out immediately after. We must
therefore go to the house of your relation without
delay."
Old Tchang began to laugh. "Some time back,"
said he, " the single copy of verses on the anniver-
sary cost licentiate Tsian more than fifteen days :
will it be so easy for you to compose these four
pieces of poetry in so short a time? My lord Sse,
if you have talent enough to enable you to finish
them, my relation will not neglect offering you a
present; and most certainly he will not attempt to
retard your departure."
" I trust entirely to you, and I beg of you to
have the kindness to arrange this business," said Sse
Yeoupe.
" In that case, Mr Sse, let us go instantly," said
old Tchang.
Is it far from this ?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
It is not very far," said the innkeeper. The
house of the lord Li is at the end of the eastern ex-
tremity of the city. It stands next to the house of
the vice-intendant Lo."
" Since it is not far," said Sse Yeoupe, " I
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
63
shall go there immediately ; and if you have any
good horses, host, take the trouble to get one ready
for me."
"That will not be difficult," said the innkeeper.
As he spoke, old Tchang went away with Sse
Yeoupe, followed by Siaohi; all three taking the
road that led to the city, and to the house of the
counsellor Li.
One is exposed to danger in traversing mountains and
high roads.
The fish fall into the nets, seduced by the brilliancy of
the waves.
The white clouds are of themselves incapable of feel-
ing ;
It is the wind that moves them about as it lists.
Old Tchang and Sse Yeoupe arrived in a short
time at the house of counsellor Li. "My lord Sse,"
said the former, " be good enough, I pray you, to
wait here a moment. I shall go in first, to announce
you to my relation, and shall immediately return
for you."
"I shall wait for you," replied Sse Yeoupe. Old
Tchang went into the house, and Sse Yeoupe re-
mained standing before the door. As he threw
his eyes around, he saw two houses that stood close
to each other. At the door of one were placed
eight banners, which had not the appearance of
being very old. Above the other doors were these
words n
" DIRECTION OF MANNERS."
The exterior had somewhat of a dilapidated
look: it was easy nevertheless to perceive that
it was the house of a retired magistrate, a man
of rather singular humour.
64
JU-KIAO-LI:
On the other side there were no banners. The
inscription over the door was :-
"SECOND DEGREE OF THE GRAND COLLEGE."
There was an appearance of great order and
arrangement about this house, and everything in-
dicated the residence of a man invested with high
administrative functions.
Sse Yeoupe had not yet concluded his observa-
tions, when he saw a servant come out from the
house, who said to him, "The lord my master is in
the saloon he begs you, sir, to be good enough to
come to him."
On coming to the door of honour, Sse Yeoupe
saw counsellor Li descending the staircase to meet
him. He cast his eyes upon him, and beheld a
high crowned cap like the peak of a mountain
the grave countenance and hollow voice of a
magistrate now freed from any further literary or-
deals; the arrogant air of an officer decorated with
the girdle. His age was between forty and fifty
years; his place was between the eighth and ninth
class. He had several yellow bands upon his gar-
ments, and streamers that descended below the
medal he wore upon his breast, above which was a
piece of black gauze. His affected air, and pom-
pous deportment, did not prevent people from laugh-
ing at his expense.
The counsellor came forward to meet Sse Yeoupe,
and led him into the saloon. There, after the usual
salutations, they sat down in the places appertain-
ing to them. Then the counsellor, addressing
Mr Sse said, " My relation, Sir, has been talking
in high terms of your talents to me; but I have
not yet been able to learn by what fortunate chance
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
65
you have been led to shew us so much condescen-
sion."
" It is very irregular to commence my acquaint-
ance with you in so unceremonious a manner," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe ; "but it is the misfortune which I
met with in being completely plundered of everything
on the road, which brought me by chance into conver-
sation with your relation, and which has conducted
me into your excellency's presence. I have been
told that you wish to have a little literary work exe-
cuted; I am under great obligation to your relation,
who has not considered me totally devoid of talent,
and who has been good enough to present me to
you for that purpose. He has given me from the
very first moment cause to remember him a long
time. It is in order to execute this business, that
I have had the boldness to present myself before
you; and I have to ask you many pardons for my
temerity."
"
Yes," said the counsellor; " the provincial
judge arrived here some days ago. I have had the
honour of drawing his attention. I wish to shew him
my respect by presenting him with a silken skreen,
and I have already got painted by a celebrated
artist four subjects, which I have here. I wish to
join to these, four explanations in verse, so that
the skreen may have eight folds. I had at first
thought of writing myself some humble poetry,
but I have not been able to find a moment's leisure.
Now that I perceive in you so much talent and
complaisance, and that you consent, my dear sir,
to take in hand the pen, I feel infinitely grateful
to you. But can I at the very commencement of
66
JU-KIAO-LI :
our acquaintance take such an unfair advantage
of your kindness?"
"The only thing I fear," said Sse Yeoupe, is
that my feeble talent does not render me worthy
of writing under your name. But since you do not
disdain to employ me, I hope that you will make
me acquainted with the subjects in question."
" Well," said the counsellor, " since you treat
me with so much complaisance, let us go into the
back garden, and take a couple of cups, and I
shall be afterwards ready to receive your instruc-
tions." He ordered his servants to serve up a
collation, and then rising, he begged Sse Yeoupe to
pass with him into the garden.
All the eastern part of the garden was planted
with flowers, and in it was a gallery enclosed with
trellis-work, painted red and fancifully designed.
It was shaded from the sun by bamboos and
flowering shrubs. The walls were dyed with
brilliant colours, and in the distance was seen a
lofty pavilion surrounded by elms and willows,
that terminated the prospect in a very agreeable
manner.
On entering the gallery, Sse Yeoupe was not in
a humour to pay much attention to these things.
Shortly afterwards the collation was brought in
and the counsellor, by way of doing honour to his
guest, sat down to table with him. They were about
drinking, when a servant entered to announce the
visit of the licentiate Tsian. "He comes very apro-
pos," said the counsellor; "go instantly and beg
him to come in."
As he said this, he rose up and went out to meet
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
67
the licentiate, and in a moment after returned with
him. Sse Yeoupe rose up also to receive him, and
perceived that the licentiate was a corpulent man,
with a long beard, a large belly, and a double
chin. " Who is that gentleman?" said the licen-
tiate to the counsellor, as soon as he perceived Sse
Yeoupe.
" That is Mr Sse of Kinling," said the counsellor.
" Ah !" replied the licentiate, " he is a guest
that comes from a great distance;" and he ceded to
him the left side. The ceremonies being terminated,
all three took their places ; and the licentiate,
addressing Sse Yeoupe, said, " Mr Sse, what
motive can have brought an inhabitant of your fine
province into our little town ?"
Before Sse Yeoupe could answer him, the coun-
sellor said, " It was not the lord Sse's intention to
come to our town: he was proceeding to the capital,
when he was robbed on the road, and obliged to
interrupt his journey. One of my relations met
him this morning by chance, and having learned
that this gentleman, young as he is, was possessed
of most distinguished talents, and knowing that I
had not yet obtained from you the four pieces of
poetry that J requested of you to write for the lord
judge, he ventured to ask him to take the trouble
of composing them. Mr Sse did not object to
the proposal, and he has been good enough to
honour me with his visit. We were going to
recreate ourselves tête d tête, my guest and I;
but the pleasure would not have been complete.
It is fortunate that you chose this moment to come
and see me. We shall now have no lack of
inspiration."
68
JU-KIAO-LI:
" This is all very well," said the licentiate;
" not however but that I have been here frequently
of late. But I have been so overwhelmed with
business and importunate visits, that I have not
had one single moment of poetical fervour. I heard
to-day that the judge had returned from his circuit
of inspection, and I came here to offer you my ser-
vices, fearing that a further delay might be the cause
of your missing the opportunity of making him your
present. My poetical ideas are however not so
abundant as I could wish them. Happily, heaven
has led hither the lord Sse, who will save me the
trouble of ransacking my head."
" I am," said Sse Yeoupe, " nothing more
than a poor traveller put to his shifts. And this
it is that suggested to me the foolish idea of
writing some verses in exchange for an act of
kindness. I take the place of the flute-player.
But the poor weeds that I can offer are very un-
worthy of the banquet set before me. I did not at
first take into consideration the scantiness of my
powers. Now that the great magician has appeared,
the little magician will find himself out of breath,
and the best thing he can do will be to retire."
' Gentlemen," said the counsellor, do not be
so modest. Since you are so complaisant, you must
both afford me the aid of your talent. Drink
quickly some cups to put you in proper humour for
composing;" and offering them some wine, he
exhorted them to drink.
After occupying themselves in this manner for
some time, Sse Yeoupe, addressing the counsellor,
said, " 1 am but a poor drinker, my lord Li. Since
you do not disdain my service, I pray you to shew
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
69
me your subjects ; and when I shall have finished,
I shall submit what I have composed to your judg-
ment."
The counsellor was unwilling to consent to
this proposal; but the licentiate Tsian seconded it,
saying, " Yes, yes, let it be so, shew us your sub-
jects. We can compose and drink at the same
time. One is no obstacle to the other."
The counsellor then sent his servants for a chest
in which the presents were kept. He opened it,
and took out four paintings representing women,
with the titles of the subjects, which he handed to
his guests. The latter unrolled them, in order to
examine them.
The first bore the inscription of The Semstresses ;
it represented two women seated opposite each other,
in the act of sewing.
The second painting was entitled The woman
weighing. It exhibited a woman weighing some-
thing in a balance, and several other females near
looking on.
The subject of the third painting was The Kitchen.
In it were seen several women in a kitchen; some
were blowing the fire, and others were preparing
the dishes, washing plates, and cooking.
The fourth subject was The Fortune-tellers. It
represented three or four women playing at mourre*
with the cups of flowers.
These were the subjects upon which the verses
were to be composed; and as there were four paint-
ings, it was necessary to have an equal number of
pieces of poetry, the allusions in which would relate
to the sentiments entertained for the person to whom
70
JU-KIAO-LI:
the paintings were to be offered. Sse Yeoupe con-
sidered them for some time without saying any-
thing. The licentiate Tsian, addressing the coun-
sellor, said, "My lord Li, you are very munificent;
these paintings that you have had executed are very
beautiful. But the subjects are very difficult to
treat; it is impossible to take them in hand all of a
sudden. One must take time to study them; I am
not capable of doing them for you in so short a time.
But I see that Mr. Sse, who is a clever man-"
"
" Master Tsian," interrupted Sse Yeoupe, " what
you have said applies to me still more strongly.
But I have some very pressing business, and I can-
not refuse making the attempt, however unsatis-
factory it may prove. I hope this will excuse my
rashness in putting myself forward, my only reason
for which being that I may the sooner take my
leave of you and depart."
" I feel very sensibly your complaisance," said
the counsellor; and he immediately ordered his
servants to bring pens, an inkstand, and a sheet of
paper. Sse Yeoupe took them without any fur-
ther ceremony, and seizing the pencil, began writing
without any hesitation.
It is not on foot that he proceeds;
A courser could not keep up with him.
He sets off like the demon, stumbles like his steed;
His paper is darkened by the clouds of smoke with
which the ink is made.
When he had finished writing, Sse Yeoupe pre-
sented his composition to Counsellor Li and the
licentiate Tsian. If this has but little to claim
your attention," said he to them may at least
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
71
iny weakness not be found too unworthy of your
confidence !"
The counsellor and the licentiate, having unrolled
the sheet of paper, found what follows
FIRST SUBJECT.-The Semstresses.
This occupation reminds us of the fair of other times.
Such were the garments, adorned with all that is most
brilliant in heaven and earth.
Skilful as Ninwa in the use of the needle,
Seated near each other, they may be compared to the
sun and the moon.
SECOND SUBJECT.-The Woman weighing.
The sweet smile of a beautiful woman will eternally prove
the greatest weight in the balance;
And at the very first glance a sulky air will be found to
be the lightest.
An incorruptible judge, who holds the balance with a
steady hand,
And suffers not, with regard to himself, an inequality
amougst men.
THIRD SUBJECT.-The Kitchen.
Water and fire wage a thousand various combats with
each other in the universe:
In the same manner our humours offer the contrast of
sourness and sweetness.
With such different flavours, how is it possible to produce
a sweet and agreeable mixture ?
You teach us how to do it by the skilful use you make
of plums and salt.
FOURTH SUBJECT.- - The Fortune-tellers.
Do not rely upon vain conjectures or the suggestions of
chance:
You would find its name existing in the thought of the
sovereign.
72
JU-KIAO-LI:
The golden cup will one day be the recompense of bril-
liaut services.
The stars which influence high employments are seen
through the clouds.
After reading these, the licentiate Tsian gave
free course to his surprise and admiration. "What
art, grace, and skill !" he exclaimed. You are
gifted, sir, with the genius of an immortal."
"These empty words, the work of a moment, are
unworthy to fix your attention," replied Sse Yeoupe.
Counsellor Li then read the verses. His taste
was not a very refined one; but as he had heard
the licentiate Tsian praise them unreservedly, he
thought they must be good; and full of inward
satisfaction, he said, " The inhabitants of your
fine provinces are very different from the natives of
this country. How happy am I to possess this
composition, and what honour will it not bring me!
But men are never satisfied; no sooner are they at
Loung, but they turn their eyes towards Chou. If
I were to ask you to transcribe these verses with
your hand, would you consent?"
" What difficulty should I have?" said Sse
Yeoupe; and he immediately asked the servants to
place a very dry and clean writing-table at the
bottom of the staircase, and then he began pre-
paring some ink, whilst counsellor Li took four
pieces of strong white silk, and had them spread
upon the table.
Sse Yeoupe, who was at this moment a little ex-
cited by wine, eagerly seized a pen; and his pro-
gress was such, that it might be compared to the
flight of dragons or the involutions of serpents. In
an instant he had finished this new task. The
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
73
licentiate and the counsellor, as they looked on,
were incessant in their praises. Sse Yeoupe, oc-
cupied with his own reflections, said to himself,
" Can such common-place ideas deserve the name
of poetry? Ah! if some day, seated near Miss
Pe, having an arbour before my eyes, and lanterns
over my head, I may alternately drink and sing,
then will my whole life be filled with delicious
thoughts ! At present the bright pearls are scat-
tered in darkness; but, interrupted as I have been
in the midst of a journey undertaken for the love of
Miss Pe, how could I do otherwise?"
While occupied with these reflections, he raised
his head, and thought he saw over the wall in the
pavilion a person stealing a glance at him through
the foliage, and who seemed anxious to escape
being seen. The face appeared to him beautiful
and interesting, and he could not help thinking that
the possessor might have as many charms as Miss
Pe, but might not probably be gifted with the same
talents. His imagination, having touched this point,
turned off from it with the rapidity of an arrow.
Then addressing counsellor Li, he said, "The
task you gave me to perform is completed; I shall
now take my leave."
The counsellor hastened to detain him. "Having
been so fortunate as to meet with a sage like you,
I cannot think of letting you go in this manner. It
is very late-you cannot go away-you must posi-
tively remain here, and accept a bad bed for the
night: to-morrow you can depart at an early hour."
" True, I may defer going till to-morrow at an
early hour," said Sse Yeoupe; "but I have neither
74
JU-KIAO-LI
horse nor baggage, and I must return to the inn to
get things in readiness."
" Do not trouble yourself on that account, Mr
Sse," said the counsellor. " I shall see to those
things."
" Do not behave so unkindly towards us," said
the licentiate, in his turn. It is by the favour of
heaven that such good friends meet together upon
earth. I wish also to do you the honours of the
country to-morrow. My lord Li must certainly not
allow you to go away."
" It is absolutely necessary that I set out to-
morrow," replied Sse Yeoupe; "I feel very sen-
sibly, master Tsian, your kindness."
" We shall speak again of this to-morrow," said
the counsellor. " Let us now finish the business of
to-day." He then engaged his two guests to come
and dine in the gallery. They all three remained at
table conversing and laughing until the lanterns were
brought. Then the licentiate quitted them, and
counsellor Li obliged Sse Yeoupe to remain and
pass the night in the library at the further end of
the gallery.
When a vulgar guest presents himself, no one thinks of
saluting him;
But the poet meets everywhere a flattering reception.
Sse Yeoupe was unable to sleep during the whole
of the night. The next morning he rose very early,
and as soon as he was dressed, he wished to de-
part ; but not seeing his host appear, he remained
some time longer. While he was waiting, Tchang
came towards him, and said, "Mr. Sse, why have
you got up so early?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
75
" Whilst I am prevented from pursuing my jour-
ney," replied Sse Yeoupe, "the days appear like
years to me. I wish I had wings to enable me to
reach the capital. I entreat you, sir, to speak to
your relation to let me have the assistance he pro-
mised me; you will do me thereby a most im-
portant service."
" As to the money for your journey, that is a
mere trifle," replied old Tchang; " he of course will
give it to you; but there is another subject about
which my relation has an earnest request to make
to you."
" What subject is that?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
" My relation is convinced by the praise which
the licentiate has given to your talents and acquire-
ments, that you are a man of the rarest merit, Mr
Sse. He has conceived a very great esteem for
you, and would wish to have you continually near
him; and as he has a son thirteen years of age, he
would wish to enter into an engagement with you,
and put this boy under your direction for a year.
You shall yourself fix the terms; and whatever they
may be, he will not presume to diminish their
amount."
"I know nothing about the duties of a precep-
tor," said Sse Yeoupe ; ' besides, I am only a tra-
veller; I am going to depart immediately ; how
therefore can I listen to such a proposal?"
As he was speaking, a servant entered, and handed
him a card of invitation. This card was from the
licentiate Tsian, engaging him to dine with him.
Sse Yeoupe hastened to reply-" I positively cannot
accept this invitation; be good enough to present
76
JU-KIAO-LI:
my respects and thanks, and take the trouble of
carrying back this card."
"The dinner has been already ordered," replied
the servant " you cannot possibly avoid remaining
half a day more, Mr Sse;" and so saying, he laid
down the card and went away.
Old Tchang then said: Mr Sse, as you are not
inclined to remain here, my relation will of course
not detain you. But you cannot by any means
refuse the invitation of the licentiate Tsian. Besides
this dinner is not one of those that are so easily
found. If the licentiate had not had a double
esteem for you, he would not have taken it into his
head to invite you. It is a dinner sent from heaven
to you."
Yes," said Sse Yeoupe, it is very obliging on
his part, but I am extremely impatient to resume
my journey."
Moderate a little your impatience," replied old
Tchang; "I shall go and see about your horse and
baggage. They dine at an early hour at the licen-
tiate's; you will drink a couple of cups with him,
and then set out immediately after."
"I entirely rely upon your good offices," said
Sse Yeoupe. As he said this, old Tchang left him,
and he remained alone seated in the gallery, a prey
to the deepest depression. In the midst of the
impatience that dried up his heart, he cursed the
necessity he was under of waiting for money to
enable him to pursue his journey. "Go," said he
to his servant, "and see if the road is good. We
shall go away, for I can no longer bear waiting in
this manner.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
77
"The garden gate is shut," said Siaohi we
cannot get out; and even if we could, we have no
money for the road : so that one way or the other
we must have patience for to-day. To-morrow,
without fail, we shall set out."
Sse Yeoupe, not knowing how to get over this
obstacle, resigned himself to the delay. As he was
thus waiting, he heard some one in the pavilion that
joined the wall saying, "The pomegranate-trees
outside the back-door are in full blossom."
This remark struck Sse Yeoupe, and made him
reflect, that the garden in which he was must cer-
tainly have a back-door. He immediately began
walking alongside the wall, for the purpose of find-
ing this door; and after having turned round a little
flowering thicket, he found it behind an artificial
rock. It was closed, but Sse Yeoupe told his ser-
vant to open it, and he advanced to see what was
at the other side. He saw at a great distance a
piece of ground planted with elms and willows, the
shade of which appeared most inviting. There were
also there two pomegranate-trees, but their blos-
soms were not in a very advanced state.
Sse Yeoupe went forward a few paces to examine
the place where he was, and perceived that the wall,
belonging to the house from which he had issued,
served also to enclose a flower-garden, and that
there was a door in it close to that through which
he had come out. As he was looking at it, the door
opened, and there appeared a youth who might be
about fifteen or sixteen years of age: he wore on
his head a light cap, and his clothes were of a
violet colour. His rosy lips, sparkling white teeth,
brilliant eyes, and finely-marked eye-brows, made
78
JU-KIAO-LI:
him look like a charming girl : it might truly be
said-
His vernal robe is formed of the leaves of the willow
and the tints of the peach-tree.
Is it a mortal or a divinity ?
Who dare envy this spirit formed of the essence of
flowers?
How is it possible to avoid being attached to this soul
that has emanated from the moon ?
One should die for love of her youth and gracefulness.
But her soft promises will calm the ardour excited by
her charms.
Is it only a young boy who has come here to laugh and
sport,
Or is it a perfume that exhales from the interior apart-
ment ?
Sse Yeoupe was struck by his appearance, and
in his joyful surprise exclaimed, Can it be that
there is under heaven so charming a young man?
Such a one must have been the Pangan so highly
lauded in ancient times !"
As he was occupied with these thoughts, he saw
the youth approach him with a lovely and engaging
air; who, after making him a bow, said, " Who
is the handsome young man that amuses himself
in profusely scattering the flowers of his talent,
who composes admirable verses without deigning
to inquire if there be any one looking at him over
the wall?"
Sse Yeoupe lost no time in replying to this cheer-
ful address, and raising his hand, said : " Entirely
occupied with the recollection of the prince of
letters, I imagined that I was playing the guitar
without being heard, and I had no idea that in
the neighbourhood on the west side, Soung, favoured
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
79
by the snow, was employed in watching me.' Now
that I have met with gold and jasper, there can be
no longer any mention of my scribbling."
" 1 have always heard say," replied the new
comer, " that pleasure is not the only thing that
seeks its kind, but that talent also has a sympathy
for talent. To judge by your merit and your
countenance, you must be an accomplished man.
I wish that we were like the rush and the reed,
which are said to lend each other mutual support.
Should you, my dear sir, be of the same disposition?"
" I see in you the gracefulness of former times,
and the deportment of a genius. When the laseras
and the vanilla are within reach, why should we
not wish to grasp them ? All that I fear is not to be
in harmony with you, and not to be worthy of the
connexion you have the goodness to propose to
me."
" If you feel no disdain for me, let us sit down
for a short time upon this stone, and communicate
the sentiments which occupy our hearts.
They both went and sat down side by side upon
a large stone which was near the garden-gate.
"Permit me," said the youth, " to ask you your
family name, your country, your age, and the
circumstances that brought you here?"
"I am Sse Yeoupe of Kinling, surnamed Lian-
sian-I am twenty years old-I was going to court
to see a certain person of distinction, when I was
suddenly attacked and robbed upon the road.
Alone, destitute of everything, and unable to ad-
vance or return, I made by chance the acquaintance
of this old Li, who asked me to compose four
80
JU-KIAO-LI:
pieces of poetry for him, he promising to furnish
me with what was necessary to continue my journey.
The verses were written yesterday, but the money
he was to lend me as a recompense is not yet forth-
coming. It was for this I was waiting when I so
unexpectedly met with your lordship, which is a
happiness sufficient for a triple existence. But I
am yet ignorant of the name of your lordship."
" My family name is Lo ; my mother, when she
brought me into the world, saw in a dream a pear-
tree in blossom, and thence comes the surname of
Mengli* which she gave me-I am now sixteen
years of age-my sister, who is younger than I,
was yesterday in the pavilion, whence she saw you
unperceived. She was struck with your merit, your
agreeable appearance, and the extreme skill that
you displayed in the use of the pen. She took
you for Litaîpe t himself come back to life. Having
heard all these circumstances from her, I felt a
great desire to have an interview with you. I did
not foresee that the accomplishment would have so
soon followed the wish, and that I should meet
your lordship. If you are in want of anything
that may be necessary to you, it follows of course
that I shall supply it. What can you expect from old
Li? He is a vulgar man, who only thinks of pushing
his own fortune. How could he appreciate talent?"
At this moment Siaohi ran up to inform his mas-
ter that breakfast had been brought in, and to engage
him to return to the house : "The lord Li," he
added, " is preparing to go out."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
81
Sse Yeoupe, who would willingly have continued
the conversation, shewed no disposition to quit the
place but Lo Mengli, on hearing what Siaohi said,
instantly rose up, saying, Since your host invites
you to breakfast, I shall quit you. But in a short
time, when there will be no one at home, we shall
again meet here. But do not say a word about me
to old Li; he and I are not on very good terms."
" Very well," said Sse Yeoupe, "I shall go in
for a moment; but above all things I entreat of you
not to fail in the rendezvous."
" Since our hearts have already met, there are
still some points upon which we must have an
understanding. You may depend upon my coming;"
and so saying, Lo Mengli retired into the garden
and disappeared.
As Sse Yeoupe was returning to the gallery,
counsellor Li came out to join him. After the
usual compliments, he said, " I am very culpable
not to have remained with you. I should have
seen you set off at an early hour this morning. But
old Tsian had most vehemently requested me to de-
tain you for the dinner that he wishes to offer you,
and this was what emboldened me to delay your
departure. The trifles that you want are all ready,
and to-morrow, without fail, you shall continue
your journey."
"It is," replied Sse Yeoupe, "a great mark of affec-
tion on your part,-my gratitude shall be unlimited."
An instant after breakfast was served up, and
when they had finished, the counsellor, addressing
his guest, said, "the sub-prefect came yesterday
to pay me a visit, which I must now return. It
82
JU-KIAO-LI
pains me very much to be thus obliged to leave
you; but what can I do ?"
Sse Yeoupe, who thought of rejoining Lo Mengli,
had been afraid that his host would not have quitted
him, and he hastened to reply, " Do whatever
will be pleasing to you : I shall remain and repose
myself after my fatigues."
" Well," said the counsellor, "I am going to
incur the guilt of another incivility ; and when I
shall have returned from this visit, it will be time
for us to go and dine with old Tsian." He then
saluted Sse Yeoupe with his hand and took leave of
him. The latter, now left at liberty, ran to the
back-door of the garden in the hope of finding Lo
Mengli there. But as in this interview things
belonging to the interior apartment were treated of,
it deserves to be described separately. Who could
have foreseen that it would give rise to sentiments
that penetrate to the very marrow of the bones?
Thus is seen, before a thicket in the moonlight, a
new object interesting from its gracefulness and
the elegance of its language.
Their sentiments are like two streams of living water,
which can never be exhausted.
Their hearts are like a wall pierced with loop holes.
Man under the influence of love turns towards the most
worthy objects.
But why does this lover go to a distance from her who
possesses his affection
The following chapter will shew if Sse Yeoupe
succeeded in finding Lo Mengli again.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
83
CHAPTER XIV.
PRESENTS FROM LO MENGLI RECEIVED BEHIND
THE GARDEN.
" Why does not talent shew itself by external advantages ! In what
places is the man of merit treated unfavourably ? In a stolen visit the
rites will be broken through for the love of the prince of letters. For
him the strict rules of a virtuous conduct will be set aside. The rectitude
of his intentions can only be known when it comes to the proof. The
first glauce marks the views of fate. It is in vain to say that heaven
regulates marriages Passion may counteract even the decisions of
heaven.
SSE Yeoupe ran with great speed to the garden-
gate, hoping to meet Lo Mengli there; but he
found the door of Lo's house closed, and could
hear no noise from the inside. He remained stand-
ing for some time in this place, his mind occupied
with various reflections.
68 Could they have been empty words that this
young man spoke to me concerning his sister ?"
thought he to himself.
Another thought then occurred to him. "I per-
ceived in him," said he, " a noble heart, and gene-
rous sentiments. It is impossible that he should
break his promise."
Whilst he was thus waiting, a thousand contra-
dictory thoughts succeeded each other in an instant.
He was lost in embarrassing reflections, when he
suddenly heard the noise of the door opening; and
Lo Mengli came towards him with a light step, say-
84
JU-KIAO-LI:
ing, " Brother, you are a man of your word. What!
so soon returned ? You really then have no dis-
dain for your friend ?"
On seeing him, Sse Yeoupe felt as much joy as if
he beheld him descend from heaven; and eagerly
running to meet him, took him by the hand, and re-
plied
laughing-" How can one arrive late, when
the rendezvous is with a beloved object?'
" In friendship," said Lo Mengli, "the begin-
ning is always good; it is the end which often
leaves us something to desire. When the conclu-
sion corresponds to the commencement, it may be
called the union of sages."
"
Those whose friendship languishes towards the
end, may be said to have no real friendship at the
beginning," replied Sse Yeoupe. "Such persons
have no pupils to their eyes : they are deprived of
sight. Behold these pines and thuyas: we have no
need to await the coming of winter to know that
they do not lose their leaves."
" Brother," said Lo Mengli, " what you say
charms me; you have relieved me from an in-
certitude that weighed heavily upon me." Then
continuing the conversation: " I have a ques-
tion to ask you; but I fear that the subject is
too serious a one for so slender a connexion as
ours. I dare not open my mouth to you on the
subject."
"A word often suffices to cement a connexion,"
said Sse Yeoupe, "and may lead to a confidence
lasting as life. Chance has brought us toge-
ther, but my affection for you is already deeply
rooted. What have you upon your mind? Let
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
85
nothing prevent you from communicating it to
me."
" As you authorize me to speak freely to you,"
replied Lo Mengli, " I shall ask you if the object
of your visit to the court be reputation or profit,
and if your business will permit of any delay?"
"In going this journey," replied Sse Yeoupe, "I
have not in view either reputation or profit; but the
object is one which touches me nearly, and will not
permit of any delay."
Lo Mengli continued his questions. " You are
in the flower of your age; your father and mother,
are without doubt in the enjoyment of robust
health ; your sister is probably provided for ?"
"I have had the misfortune to lose my father and
mother," replied Sse Yeoupe. "I am absolutely
alone in the world, and still unmarried."
"Brother," said Lo Mengli, "at your age, gifted
with such fine talents, and with a face like to the
jewel of a crown, many persons must have thrown
fruit to you, and you cannot have missed making
choice of a connexion. How comes it that you
are still in search of the phenix, alone and isolated
in the universe ?"
" Not to tell you an untruth," said Sse Yeoupe,
" if I had thought only of riches and titles, I might
long ago have had a wife in my house. But I must
expose my weakness to you: in reflecting upon the
five duties that regulate human life, I thought that
I had nothing to do with the first, as I have unfor-
tunately lost my father and mother, and have no
brothers. As to the obligations that bind the sub-
ject to the prince, and friends to each other, 1 know
86
JU-KIAO-LI:
not if I shall ever have occasion to conform myself
to them. And as to the tie which unites husband
and wife, unless I find an accomplished beauty, a
woman endowed with talents and virtues, who may
be a companion to me through all my life, I should
feel but little inclination to marry, were I to be
offered even the daughter of a learned man, inha-
biting the hall of jasper, or mounted upon the golden
horse
This is the reason why I have remained
alone exposed to tempests."
" Those are noble sentiments, brother Sse, and
capable of drawing tears of tenderness from the eyes
of all the young girls in the empire who are gifted
with any talent." As he spoke, Lo Mengli let a
sigh escape, and then added-" The choice that
you wish to make of an accomplished beauty for a
wife, is a very difficult thing, brother Sse. The
manouvres of relations, and the deceits of match-
makers, are equally unfitted to inspire confidence.
Thence it is, that so many husbands, full of merit
and talent, have reason to complain of the depth of
the interior apartment. Even when two persons
meet who are fitted for each other, has not the prince
of letters forbidden them to omit the rites, in order
to arrive at a happy result?"
"These ceremonial rules are a general law," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe ; "but is it for the man of real
talent, for the charming and virtuous woman, that
they have been laid down ?"
"Brother," said Lo Mengli, "since the object
of your journey is neither profit nor reputation,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
87
you have no doubt found some person according to
your wishes, as you do not complain of the fatigue
of so long a journey."
"Brother Lo," replied Sse Yeoupe; " from a
person of so sound a judgment as you have, and
who have shewn me so much affection, I cannot
think of concealing anything. The object of my
journey is in fact marriage, and I am going to en-
treat a doctor of the grand college to interest him-
self for me. But the period of the examinations
is approaching : I fear that he may be sent from
the capital to preside at some provincial exami-
nation, and that I shall not be able to meet
him. This is the reason I am so anxious to set
out."
"She who has merited your choice, must be a
very accomplished person," said Lo Mengli ;
but you have not yet told me whose daughter
she is."
"She is," replied Sse Yeoupe, " the daughter
of my countryman Pe, the counsellor of state. Her
name is Houngiu. For grace and beauty she has
not an equal. She is also perfectly skilled in the
art of writing verses, and we ourselves must yield
the palm to her upon this point. As to the esteem
she entertains for talent, there has never been a per-
son either in ancient or modern times, who has had
more than she has so that sleeping or waking, it
is impossible for me to detach my thoughts from
her. And if I do not succeed in obtaining her for a
wife, I should wish to remain a bachelor all my
life."
On hearing this, Lo Mengli paused for a moment
88
JU-KIAO-LI:
to reflect then putting another question to Sse
Yeoupe, he said, " What is the sirname of the
counsellor of state Pe, and where is his resi-
dence?"
"His sirname is Hiouan, and his title of honour
Thaihiouan : he lives in the village of Kinchi."
On hearing this answer, Lo Mengli perceived
that the person in question was his maternal uncle ;
but not wishing to let this appear, he said, If she
has so much beauty, it is not surprising that she
should have inspired you with such strong affec-
tion. But the empire is vast; suppose that another
person should be found gifted with like charms ;
what would you do, brother Sse ?"
" When one is sensible to the charms of beauty,
how can one have two kinds of heart ? If another
could be found possessing equal beauty, it would
be quite natural that I should feel the same passion
for her. But to quit one, and attach myself to the
other, would be a treachery of which the fear of
death could not even make me guilty."
This reflection caused Lo Mengli again to pause.
Then after the lapse of a moment, he said : " Bro-
ther, your passion shews itself in your language.
Your line of conduct cannot be changed. Why
therefore defer any longer? I have brought with
me what is necessary for your journey."
Lo Mengli then drew from his sleeve thirty ounces
of silver, and presented them to Sse Yeoupe, say-
ing-" Little is necessary for such light baggage;
but if this should not be sufficient, here are besides
a pair of my sister's golden bracelets, with ten fine
pearls, which will assist in providing for your wants
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
89
on the road ;" and Lo Mengli took from his arms
his two bracelets, and offered them to Sse Yeoupe,
together with a necklace of fine pearls.
" Ten ounces of silver are sufficient for my jour-
ney," said Sse Yeoupe. What necessity is there
for offering me so many things? My dear brother,
you are too generous towards me. It is already
too much to accept of this money. As for the
bracelets and pearls, they are precious objects be-
longing to your sister, and I cannot permit myself
to take them."
" Can a scholar such as you," said Lo Mengli,
" make use of similar language? A necessitous
traveller finds himself embarrassed at each new
demand he is obliged to make. You can put these
pearls and bracelets in your girdle, and reserve
them for unforeseen circumstances. If you do not
make use of them, you will keep them, and return
them to me another time when we shall meet.
The news of your return will be very gratifying to
me."
"Brother," replied Sse Yeoupe, you unite, in
your manner of obliging, all the seductive delicacy
of a young girl to the generosity of a mature age.
Are you an unique being, formed of the vapours of
rivers and mountains ? Having met you only by
chance, what good fortune was it that inspired
you with such favourable dispositions towards me ?
At first I was as impatient to depart as an un-
trained horse. Now the excess of your affection
has made me like the bird that flies round its mas-
ter,-like the imagination that attaches itself to a
beautiful flower. You intoxicate my heart, you
soften my soul. Bound, subjugated, I can no longer
90
JU-KIAO-LI:
support the idea of separating myself from you.
Hitherton mind had contemplated only the bonds
of marriage: I was ignorant of the ties of friend-
ship. You add an excellent friend to the other ob-
jects which will occupy my thoughts. You make
me feel that a single body, a single soul, may suffer
in two persons."
"I have been educated by my deceased father,"
said Lo Mengli. "I have led the retired life of
a young girl ; I have never received the lessons of
any master; it has therefore not been possible for
me to make friends. But in the first moment that
I met you, I know not how it was, but you in-
spired me with affection. Do you, whose sentiments
have more energy than mine, explain to me what I
feel."
The force of my sentiments has nothing but
what is natural; yours, brother Lo, have the mild-
ness of water. There are some verses of Litaïpe,
which say, The flower of the peach-tree, placed
upon the surface of the water, sinks to the depth of a
hundred feet; such, and still more penetrating, is the
affection that you shew me. It would seem as if
these verses alluded to what you have evinced to-
wards me to-day. On my part, what proof have I
given you? It is but a point, considering the
terms upon which we are."
"The thing which you consider the most difficult
to reconcile yourself to, is the idea of our separa-
tion," said Lo Mengli; and what troubles me, is
the difficulty of our meeting again hereafter. Who
knows, when once we shall separate, if a time will
ever come, when I shall again find myself in your
company?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
91
," What is that you say ?" asked Sse Yeoupe with
surprise. " Our interview of to-day has rendered
you and me, though merely friends, more inti-
mately united than are relations. You should have
constancy in your affections; and as for me, I am
not amongst the number of the ungrateful. I shall
repair to court, and make as little stay there as
possible. On my return, I shall pass this way,
and shall consider it my duty to pay a visit to the
lady your mother. We shall then so contrive it
as to meet again, and renew our conversation.
How should it be possible that we should never see
each other again ?"
Lo Mengli, whose mind was pre-occupied, re-
mained for some time without answering; and Sse
Yeoupe continued, "You are silent, brother is it
because you think me capable of not coming
back?"
"My silence was not caused," replied Lo Men-
gli, by the suspicion that you would not come
back; what I fear is, that when you return, I
myself shall have become invisible like a second
Tseuhiu."
If your mother reside in this house, she will
not certainly send her son to live in another town.
I suppose then, if you have a sincere affection for
me, that there can be no obstacle to our meeting;
how can you become invisible?"
" To meet or remain separated, depends not upon
man. The affairs of this world have a mysterious
progress, which it is impossible to calculate. How,
brother, can you be so sure of what is to happen?"
" What depends upon heaven cannot be fore-
92
JU-KIAO-LI:
seen," said Sse Yeoupe ; " but that which depends
upon man may be calculated. If you mean to say
that within a certain time I shall not come back to
see you, I know what reliance I can place upon my
own resolutions. If you mean that in some time
you will no longer have any wish to see me, why
then have you desired to see me to-day? This is
perfectly clear and easy to unravel."
" At present that I am at liberty to see you, I
have seen you," replied Lo Mengli. If at a future
time I should not see you, it will be because it will
be no longer possible for me: and this is what I
cannot be sure of beforehand."
" At the commencement of our interview," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe, you spoke to me without fear
or reserve; and yet you apologized for touching on
a subject too serious for a connexion of such short
standing. Now that the conformity of our senti-
ments has given birth to a union as intimate as that
between the flesh and the bones, you speak to me
in mysterious and enigmatical language. May you
not now in your turn be reproached with making
use of frivolous expressions in the course of an inti-
macy thus become so close ? It is a thing that I
cannot explain satisfactorily to myself."
" What I said to you at the commencement, I
had a right to say," replied Lo Mengli; and that
was the reason I spoke to you without reserve.
Now I am silent with regard to what I think I ought
not to reveal. But where is the necessity for so
many explanations ?"
" I am here alone, and but for the space of a day,"
said Sse Yeoupe. " What distinction do you make
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
93
between the things that you may tell me, and those
which you think you ought to conceal from me?"
"I wished to tell you," replied Lo Mengli, "the
things which might have led to some result; but
what need is there to inform you of those which can
lead to none?
" I have always heard," replied Sse Yeoupe,
" that what was most estimable in friendship, was
the interchange of thoughts; but since you have
thoughts that you cannot confide to me, what be-
comes of this interchange between us? And as I
have not yet your confidence, and as you confine
your friendship to making me presents, I should
blush to accept them. This would be purchasing
friendship with gold. I am poor, it is true, and
destitute of every thing necessary for my journey
but this I should not consent to, had I a much
greater distance to travel." He then endeavoured
to make Lo Mengli take back the necklace and
bracelets.
" Brother," said Lo Mengli, with emotion,
"
why do you make me such severe reproaches ?
The very first moment I saw you, I wished to con-
fide something to you, and that was the reason that
I questioned you about your journey and your
sojourn. I now know that what I had to say could
turn to no useful purpose, and would only bring
shame upon a certain person; and therefore I have
been silent, and not because I was unwilling to
communicate my thoughts to you, or had any want
of confidence in you: but since you consider my
reserve a crime, I cannot any longer refrain from
speaking, and taking the shame upon myself."
" What shame can there arise from a conversation
94
JU-KIAO-LI:
between two friends ? I hope you are going to ex-
plain all this to me."
Lo Mengli, who seemed to be restrained by a
sense of confusion, remained for some time silent.
At length, being still further urged by Sse Yeoupe,
he broke silence, and said, "I have a twin sister,
who is consequently, like myself, sixteen years old.
Her features are like mine, for she very much re-
sembles me. She has devoted herself to the study
of poetry and literature. Since our father quitted
us, my sister' and I have been to each other, recipro-
cally, as instructor and friend. Although she cannot
in any way be compared to the perfect beauty whom
you lately lauded, yet she holds talent in such
esteem, that she dreads, equally as much as that
beauty, to make a bad choice. She and I have
upon this subject the same views. My mother's
bad health has hitherto prevented her from seeking
for a husband for her daughter. I am still too
young to have many acquaintances; besides, ' the
lintel of our door has fallen down,' so that no one
knows that she still inhabits the interior apartment,
waiting to be settled in life. Yesterday she saw
you from the pavilion. On beholding your deport-
ment, which announced a scholar endowed with
the most shining qualities, she could not prevent
herself from thinking of the fall of the plums
I
saw what was passing in her mind, and this induced
me to come and meet you, with the intention of
acting as a go-between. I learned from you that
your vows were fixed elsewhere; I saw the obstacle
that stood in the way of our wishes; and this it was
that induced me to remain silent. The object which
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
95
led me to meet you to-day appeared to me a feasi-
ble one ; but should you come back again, that
object being impracticable, how could I prevent
myself from blushing internally, even though you
should be good enough to refrain from all raillery
on the occasion ? This is what made me speak of
the possibility of our never seeing each other again.
But you heaped such unjust reproaches upon me,
that I could no longer refrain from making you ac-
quainted with the whole truth. In thus revealing
to you the secret sentiments of a young girl, I feel
the blood ascending to my forehead, and that my
face is all on fire. If you should communicate
them to others, you will certainly make me die of
shame."
This disclosure, full of candour, caused no less
joy than surprise to Sse Yeoupe. " Brother," he
exclaimed," are you jesting, and do you wish to
mock me ?"
"I have opened my heart to you," sorrowfully
replied Lo Mengli; " how then could I think of
jesting with you?
Am I not abused by a dream?" again asked
Sse Yeoupe.
" We are speaking in the face of heaven and in
the open day : therefore you are not abused by a
dream," said Lo Mengli.
" If it be a reality," cried Sse Yeoupe," you
then wish to make me mad with joy, and to kill me
with desire ?"
" A project which has failed beyond all resource,
leaves not even room for hope," replied Lo Mengli;
"and yet you speak of joy, brother what can be
the subject of it ?"
96
JU-KIAO-LI :
" Isolated as I am in the midst of four seas,"
said Sse Yeoupe, " behold on a sudden a young
beauty, like unto you, my dear brother, in talents
and appearance, presents herself in profile before my
eyes, and promises to be mine for life. Were I a
tree or a plant, I should still feel the soft influence
of spring: but being a man, why should you be
astonished at my joy?"
"Brother," replied Lo Mengli; " you have
already found her who is destined to form with you
the well-assorted union How could you reject
the sweet-flavoured peach, and gather the bitter
plum ? The sentiments which seduced my sister and
me are nought but vain desires."
" There is," replied Sse Yeoupe, " a passage of
Soungiu that says, ' there are not in the empire any
beauties to be compared to those of my village, and
there are none equal to the daughter of my neigh-
bour who lives on the eastern side'. These words
may be applied to you and your sister. Now that
chance has offered me a charming person like her,
if I should neglect seeking her in order to pay her my
most earnest vows, should I not resemble Yekoung,
who took a delight in looking at painted dragons,
but who ran away when he saw the living ones ?"
" Since you are desirous not to disoblige my
sister," said Lo Mengli, " she will not prove more
ungrateful than the beauty who has already made
herself mistress of your heart."
It is I who would be an ungrateful one;-but
could I be so ?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
97
" I am convinced that you have not an ungrateful
heart," said Lo Mengli " but if, sensible to the
merit of my sister, you break faith with her prede-
cessor, may it not happen, when you shall meet
with another superior beauty, that you will aban-
don my sister, in her turn, as you would a dog
lying upon straw? If you should think but lightly
of the resentment of our old friends and the loss
of their favour, you are not the man for whom
my sister and I have conceived so much esteem,
and whom she would wish to attach to herself for
life."
"Your mysterious propositions had penetrated
to the bottom of my heart," said Sse Yeoupe; and
now your language, full of candour, augments my
esteem and respect for you ; but my soul is softened,
my imagination bewildered, I know not if I ought
to live or die; in fact, I know not if I am still in
existence."
" You are a man of quick passions," replied Lo
Mengli. Your sentiments become feeble when not
opposed, but obstacles give them force. With re-
gard to the affair in question, I have thought of a
plan that may reconcile all."
Provided," replied Sse Yeoupe, smiling, "that
what you propose will enable me to possess both.
But I am not sure that the young child who inhabits
the interior apartment, would willingly listen to
such a project."
True, my sister is very young," said Lo Mengli ;
" but she has a prudent and reflecting mind, and
you should not consider her a child. The sincere
love inspired by a sage leads to perfection. My
sister herself said to me yesterday-The woman
98
JU-KIAO-LI:
that a man marries with all the usual ceremonies, is
the first wife; she with whom he contracts less
regular ties, is the second and there is certainly
something irregular in being one's own match-maker.
There is however nothing culpable in endeavouring
to surmount the influence of the stars, and to become
the companion of a virtuous man. All that is to be
feared, is that the wise person whom you seek may
not consent to such an arrangement."
On hearing this, Sse Yeoupe felt the most lively
satisfaction. If the person of whom you speak
was not in fact full of wisdom," said he, " I should
cease to desire her. If she has as much as I be-
lieve her to possess, what danger is there that so
wise a girl should nourish jealousy in her heart ?
And you, my dear friend, who promise me a com-
panion so congenial to my wishes, what forced
distinction do you make between the first and
second wife ? You fear perhaps that when I shall be
made more happy than I deserve to be, by the pos-
session of these two charming girls, I shall not
entertain for them the same affection: my sentiments
towards them shall be like the dazzling light of
day."
This declaration gave Lo Mengli the most lively
pleasure. "Brother, if you can thus secure the in-
terests of my sister, nothing more remains than to
give you a promise without further preliminary.
But the Genii of heaven and of earth are listening to
us ; and the sea will be dried up and the rocks will
crumble into dust, before the promise shall be for-
gotten."
"A thought strikes me," said Sse Yeoupe. "My
marriage with Miss Pe is still an affair floating in
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
99
uncertainty. But since I have the dear consent of
your sister, what should prevent me stopping here
some days, and finding out a go-between to con-
clude the business immediately?
"
When you arrived," said Lo Mengli, " your
vows, my dear brother, were directed towards Miss
Pe. If you should thus stop half way to marry my
sister, it would be a breach of your first engagements;
and when it should come to Miss Pe's knowledge,
she would have every right to complain of it; and
this would be laying up for the future motives
of discord, and subjects of contest. Besides, my
sister is still very young; and once united to a hus-
band, all change would be rendered impossible.
Repair quickly to the capital, and conclude without
delay your marriage with Miss Pe. But there is one
question more I must ask you."
What is it you wish to know?" said Sse
Yeoupe.
" You have, my dear brother, devoted your
thoughts to Miss Pe: but does she, on her side,
know of your existence in the world?"
"My dear brother," replied Sse Yeoupe, " since
you carry to such a length your affection for me,
I ought to conceal nothing from you." And he
then related to him all that had passed when he
had filled up the rhymes upon the Vernal Willows,
and been put to the proof in composing The Fare-
well to the Crane, and the Welcome of the Swallow.
After having heard this account, Lo Mengii
said, " Well, my dear brother, you should hasten to
fulfil the engagements you have entered into with
Miss Pe. You have no further occasion to solicit
me. That affair once terminated, the marriage of
100
JU-KIAO-LI:
my sister will follow of course; you should have
no dread of my breach of faith."
" I am convinced that you will not break your
word with me," said Sse Yeoupe. "But my heart
is restless and agitated at the idea of being obliged
to quit you so soon after our meeting."
"And can you suppose that I am less afflicted?"
said Lo Mengli; "but I console myself in thinking
that we shall soon be reunited for ever. Should
we, retained by our affection, remain here together
any longer, I fear that we may be seen by some of
the servants. Another time we shall have numerous
subjects of conversation."
" Well," replied Sse Yeoupe, "I have all that is
necessary for my journey, and I shall immediately
set out without taking leave of old Li."
" You will do well then," said Lo Mengli, to
go immediately from this; but I still have advice to
offer you before your departure."
"Permit me, my dear friend, to entreat of you to
afford me your counsel," said Sse Yeoupe.
"The views of a man gifted with fine talents,
and solid and durable merit, are not bounded by
riches and titles," replied Lo Mengli; but
glory and honour are the worthy objects of his am-
bition. Since you, my dear brother, are endowed
with such uncommon faculties, conduct yourself so
that this journey may accelerate for you the mo-
ment when you shall hear the song of the stag
Endeavour to obtain the advancement and reputa-
tion which you have a right to hope for, after which
every thing will become easy and practicable. How
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
101
many young men are there of distinguished intel-
lect, who might succeed in the world, and take ad-
vantage of the esteem shewn to talent, if their
conduct was pure and irreproachable ! Why hap-
pens it so often that they exhaust their time and
means in playing the part of effeminate and frivolous
fops, instead of fulfilling the duties befitting men of
merit."
On hearing these words, Sse Yeoupe assumed a
new expression of countenance, and after giving
his utmost thanks to Lo Mengli, said-" My dear
brother, this language so noble and full of reason,
deserves to remain engraven on my heart. Should
I obtain any advancement, I shall, on my return,
beg of you to be my guide and support."
As he said this, Sse Yeoupe called Siaohi to the
garden door, and said to him, "We are going to
set off immediately."
" The path," said Lo Mengli, "leads along the
ramparts of the city, towards the northern gate.
I ought to accompany you further; but as I fear to
be seen by some one, it is better for me to quit you
here. May your journey be a happy one, brother
Sse !" And as he spoke, some tears escaped from
his eyes; but Lo Mengli hastened to wipe them
away with his sleeve.
At this sight, Sse Yeoupe himself `could not re-
strain his tears. "You and I," he exclaimed, can
scarcely support the grief of this separation. But
watch over, I pray you, for the sake of Sse Yeoupe's
happiness, the gentle inhabitant of the interior
apartment, with all the care and tenderness ima-
ginable
102
JU-KIAO-LI:
Lo Mengli dried his tears, and replied by a nod
of his head.
The two friends remained for a moment as if en-
chained near each other. At length, impelled by
necessity, they let go each other's hands, and re-
peated :-
Harmony of sentiment is the foundation of tender affec-
tion,
And separation becomes an insupportable evil.
The man of the most manly character, when put to this
proof,
Cannot restrain the tears that betray his emotion.
Lo Mengli re-entered the garden, and Sse
Yeoupe went out of the town by the northern gate.
Fearing that counsellor Li and the licentiate Tsian
might come to importune and detain him, he did
not dare to go back to his former inn, but went
to another house to pass the night. There he ex-
pended some ounces of silver in purchasing bag-
gage and a horse, and the next morning at an early
hour resumed his journey.
While proceeding, his thoughts rushed confusedly
through his mind and completely absorbed him.
Formerly he had been occupied only with the idea
of Miss Pe, but now other ideas had been added
to this,-the recollection of Lo Mengli and Miss
Lo. His reflections left him not an instant of re-
pose, and he gave free course to them. "I am ac-
quainted," thought he, "with Miss Pe's talents,
but not with her beauty; neither have I seen the
features of Miss Lo, but I can form some idea of
them by those of the brother, which I have seen.
Besides, without speaking of her person, by mar-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
103
rying her I shall enjoy every day the society of
her brother, which is sufficient of itself to render
life happy. Lo Mengli is very young," he con-
tinued, ' but his mind is full of all imaginable
delicacy, and his sensibility equals his judgment.
He is a young man equally remarkable for pene-
tration and acquirements ; and since he lauds the
talents of his sister, there is no reason to suppose
that he exaggerates them. But supposing that
she has not pursued any solid studies, yet when
once she shall be united to Miss Pe, and inhabit
the same apartment, she will, without trouble and
almost imperceptibly, make a progress that will
lead to perfection. What happiness is thine, Sse
Yeoupe, to have met these two charming wo-
men!"
Entirely occupied with these seductive thoughts,
he let his horse proceed in his own way, and tra-
velled on without being conscious of it. He was
approaching a place where there was a military post,
when he suddenly heard the sound of cymbals,
which some soldiers were playing. Behind them
marched several officers, bearing blue standards,
and after these came a number of persons ranged
in processional order. Sse Yeoupe learned from
one of these persons, whom he questioned, that it
was the judge of the province returning from a cir-
cuit he had been making. He was therefore ob-
liged to quit his horse, and stand on the side of the
road while the judge passed by : an instant after,
he perceived a blue parasol, and a large sedan
chair, escorted by some scores of officers belong-
ing to the tribunal. In this sedan chair was the ma-
104
JU-KIAO-LI:
gistrate ; behind him came a crowd of subaltern
officers composing his suite.
Amongst these last was a messenger, who on per-
ceiving Sse Yeoupe began to examine him with great
attention; and then jumping from his horse, he ran
up to him, crying out, "It is our young lord; in
how many places have we been seeking you during
the last spring? And how happens it that you are
now here?"
Sse Yeoupe, very much astonished, asked him
who he was?
" I am," replied the man, "a messenger in the
service of his excellency lord Sse, judge of the pro-
vince. It was I whom our master sent to seek
you last spring, sir. Have you forgotten me?
"Ah! is it you?" replied- Sse Yeoupe. 'And
where is your master at present ?"
"Ah!sir, was it not he that has just passed by ?"
replied the messenger.
" What ! was that my uncle?" said Sse Yeoupe.
" But it is not long since he returned to court, to
give an account of his operations. How comes it
that he has already been sent upon a new mission ?"
"My master does not like residing in the capi-
tal," replied the messenger; "his preceding mis-
sion to the province of Houkouang detained him
only half of the year, so he requested to be al-
lowed to employ the rest of it on the present cir-
cuit. Ever since he sent for you, he has been per-
petually thinking of you, sir; mount your horse
quickly, and come and present yourself to him."
In compliance with this advice, Sse Yeoupe
mounted his horse, and turned back the way he
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
105
came. The messenger also got on horseback:
" Ride slowly, sir," said he : "I shall go forward,
and inform our master;" and striking his horse, he
rode on quickly. An instant after, he returned and
joined Sse Yeoupe. "Sir," said he, "our master
has been delighted to find that you were here. He
says that a high road is not a proper place for your
interview ; and he charged me to place myself at
your disposal, and to conduct you to his mansion,
where you will meet together."
" But," said Sse Yeoupe, " it is thirty or forty
miles' from this to his mansion and I fear we shall
not be able to reach it to-day."
" Our master's mansion is in the capital of the
department," said the courier : " we are not going
to the chief town of the canton. From this to the
capital, there are scarcely seven or eight milest."
The two travellers continued their route, convers-
ing together, and soon arrived at the gate of the man-
sion. The officers who were guarding it accosted
Sse Yeoupe, saying, " Enter quickly, sir: our mas-
ter is waiting for you in the interior saloon."
Sse Yeoupe dismounted from his horse, recom-
mended Siaohi to take care of him, and putting
his clothes and head-dress in order, he proceeded
to the back apartments. There he saw the in-
spector-general Sse standing at the entrance of
the saloon, waiting for him. Sse Yeoupe made him
an obeisance; and the exultations being performed,
his uncle ordered him to sit by his side, and seeing
that Sse Yeoupe was a handsome and well made
young man, whose appearance denoted the posses-
106
JU-KIAO-LI:
sion of talent, he felt infinitely rejoiced. "My dear
nephew," said he, " I recollect, when first I saw
you, you had still your hair hanging down. It is
now several years that we have been separated,
and I had no idea that you had become a full-
formed man, with a prepossessing countenance. This
is for your uncle, now enfeebled by age, a subject of
unutterable satisfaction."
"I have been SO unfortunate," said Sse Yeoupe,
" as to lose my father when I was still a child,
and my mother a short time afterwards. Fate also
threw obstacles in my way, which prevented
me from running to throw myself at the feet of my
venerable uncle, and profit by his wise counsels.
An isolated and wandering orphan, without any
protector, the only sound I have been able to make,
has been that of a house falling to ruin. And at
this moment, in looking forward or backward,
I feel a confusion most difficult to get over."
" I am old," said the inspector Sse ; "I have no
children besides, I am tired of travelling : the
career which I pursue must have a termination. I
see in you, my dear nephew, a young man in the
flower of his age, and fitted for anything. You
are one of those couriers who go a hundred leagues
a day. You ought, in time, to raise your family to
the highest degree of renown. This idea banishes
sorrow from the house of your uncle."
" What I have hitherto wanted," replied Sse
Yeoupe, "I may henceforward hope to obtain from
you. But to prevent me from falling into total
ruin, the streams issuing from the same source must
re-unite at Mount Mei. It is only by these means
that I shall be enabled to acquit myself by de-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
107
grees of the duties imposed upon me by my
age."
"I have no son," replied the inspector Sse,
'and you have lost your parents : this I remarked
to you in my letter last spring. I wished that the
uncle and nephew should become father and son.
These names will render less bitter the thought of
death which is continually present to me; and when
the time shall come to dispose of what I possess, I
shall restore it, as one may say, to my deceased
brother and sister-in-law. To make any other use
of it, would be to wish the annihilation of my own
race, and the ruin of our family. I know not, my
dear nephew, if you have sufficiently reflected upon
my proposal."
" Your intentions, my dear uncle, in what light
soever I consider them, are meant to serve an
orphan. This was the sole object of the wishes
of the parents I have lost; and my inclinations shall
never go contrary to the desires of those parents."
This answer filled the inspector Sse with joy.
He immediately made choice of a fortunate day,
and ordered preparations to be made for a great
banquet, at which he intended his nephew should
recognise him for a father. After that moment, the
names of father and son were the only ones made
use of between them. All the magistrates and offi-
cers of the department and of the canton, as well
as the functionaries of the neighbouring jurisdic-
dictions, as soon as they heard that the judge of
the province had adopted a son, hastened to make
him their felicitations, and bring him presents.
Amongst the number was counsellor Li, who came
to present his silken skreen with its four paintings.
108
JU-KIAO-LI:
That day the inspector-general, being occupied with
some business in his office, he sent Sse Yeoupe into
the saloon to receive the visits of all the magis-
trates.
When counsellor Li recognised Sse Yeoupe in
the person of the newly-adopted son, he was con-
founded, and hastily quitting his place, he came
to make him an obeisance, and to excuse him-
self, saying: "I must have appeared very culpa-
ble in your sight some short time back. Whilst I
was absent paying visits, you took the opportunity
of departing. I know not what motive you had,
unless it be that you were offended at my not hav-
ing remained to keep you company. I had got
ready some trifling presents, and the articles of
which you stood in need. We sought for you in
every direction without being able to discover any
traces of you. My rather uncivil conduct has ren-
dered me guilty towards a man of merit and dis-
tinction ; but it has never ceased to be for me a
source of regret and mortification. Even when
you called on me, I did not recognise your horse
and servants*. This is like having eyes, and yet
not being able to see Mount-Tai. Now that I
have the good fortune to appear before you, per-
mit me to implore the pardon of my negligence and
impoliteness."
The numberless favours which were shewn to
me in your mansion, are for ever engraven on my
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
109
heart," said Sse Yeoupe. " It so happened that
I
had business to transact the day after that of which
you speak, which obliged me to resume my journey
without delay; besides, I was unwilling to give any
trouble to the lord Tsian. This was what hindered
me from taking leave of you, my worthy host, and
offering you my acknowledgments. What could I
have asked for more than you did for me?"
" Your greatness of soul is like the ocean," said
the counsellor Li; " but though you may not be
vexed with me, yet I am far from being satisfied
with myself." He then reiterated twice or thrice
more his excuses, after which he retired with the
other magistrates.
Proud and haughty with the poor,
Obsequious and cringing towards the rich ;
It is thus generally that the little minded
Conduct themselves in all countries.
When the inspector-general had expedited the
business that detained him, he examined the objects
that had been sent him as presents. All that was
of gold or silver, the stuffs and provisions, were re-
fused without any exception ; as to the verses,
paintings, and complimentary productions, in which
the virtues and talents displayed in his admini-
stration were celebrated, he could not reject them,
though filled with personal eulogies. He even read
them with attention, one after the other; the greater
number were made up of those common-place
flatteries applicable to every one. But when he
came to the four pieces of verse upon the silken
skreen of counsellor Li, the elegance and superiority
of the style, and the beauty of the writing, appeared
to him equally remarkable. They pleased him so
110
JU-KIAO-LI:
much that he ordered his officers to take the skreen
into his apartment, and place it in such a manner
that he might have it continually before his eyes.
A short time after, Sse Yeoupe came and joined him;
and his uncle, pointing to the skreen, said, "There
are four pieces of verse of the most perfect beauty
there is not a single fault in them; I have read them
with the greatest delight. It was counsellor Li
who sent them to me, but he is not capable of pro-
ducing such poetry; I cannot imagine by whom
they could have been composed. I have heard it
said that you are an admirer of poetry if so, it is
impossible that you can be insensible to the grace-
ful style of these stanzas."
" It was I," replied Sse Yeoupe, " who wrote
these verses for counsellor Li. They are rather
clumsy and obscure, and do not merit the praise you
give them, father."
The inspector-general's surprise was equal to his
satisfaction. "This is very singular indeed," said
he. "I was not a little astonished that there should
have been found so skilful a pencil in the province
of Chantoung, and I had as little suspicion that my
son was possessed of such remarkable talent. But
tell me, how did you come to write these verses for
the counsellor?
.6 As I was coming here some days ago, I was
stopped upon the high road, and robbed of all my
baggage. Unable to continue my journey, I found
myself in the greatest possible embarrassment.
Chance brought me acquainted with this counsellor.
He promised to advance me the money necessary
for my journey, on condition of my writing these
verses. He merely told me that they were meant to
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
111
be presented to a judge of the province; but I did
not know, father, that you were that judge."
" We have been so full of business these few days
past," replied the inspector-general, "that I have
not yet had time to learn all that has happened to
you. This spring I sent messengers to you, to
whom you promised that you would come to meet
me. Why did you not come at that time? And how
happens it that you arrive at the present moment ?"
" When at home, I quitted the house but very
seldom," replied Sse Yeoupe. " I knew very little
of the country, and imagined that the high road
near the mouth of the river was so easy to follow,
that I threw the reins on my horse's neck. I lost
my way, and arrived at the hamlet of Keouyoung,
near the village of Kinchi. I determined to quit it
the next morning; but having fallen so ill that I
could not proceed, I was obliged to demand an
asylum in a monastery, where I remained fifteen
days. On my recovery I perceived that the time
was past within which you appointed me to meet
you, father. The reason of my being now here is,
that during my stay in the monastery I learned
that a magistrate of that country, named Pe, had a
daughter gifted with the rarest talent for poetry,
who was at the same time possessed of the most
extraordinary beauty. I took it in my head to
ask her in marriage. Every one told me that
this lord Pe was extremely difficult to be pleased
in a son-in-law, and that he would not enter into
any engagement till after the utmost precaution.
I had also heard speak of a Dr Gou of Kinling,
member of the grand academy, who is his near
relative, and by whose advice he is guided in every-
112
JU-KIAO-L1:
thing. Having been recently informed that this Dr
Gou had been called to court by an imperial decree,
I undertook this journey with the two-fold motive,
first of inquiring after you, father, and next of
calling upon Dr Gou to beg of him to be my go-
between."
" These are most singular coincidences," ex-
claimed the inspector-general Sse. "This magistrate
Pe must be, I suppose, Pe Thaihiouan, and Pe
Thaihiouan was my fellow collegian. I am perfectly
well acquainted with every thing concerning him.
His daughter has really an admirable talent for
poetry, and he is, in fact, very difficult to be pleased
in a son-in-law, so much so, that he would sooner
risk his life than yield in that point."
"How is that?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
The inspector-general then stated to him the
adventure relative to the verses upon the china-
asters, the proposal made by the inspector-general
Yang, the refusal he met with, and the mission
on which Pe had in consequence been sent to the
captive emperor. After having informed him of all
these particulars, he said-" Such shining merit
as yours, added to that of such a companion, should
you obtain her, will form a charming union. Gou
Touian will be an excellent go-between, and I shall
write to him. All this promises something; but
still, when I think of the character of this old man,
and his fickleness of disposition, I see there are yet
many difficulties to be got over."
" What difficulties ?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
"
No matter how great your talent may be, you
are as yet only a poor bachelor; and I fear that
Dr Gou, who is a renowned scholar, will look with
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
113
disdain upon your humble rank. This is the dif-
ficulty to which I allude. The period of the ex-
aminations is approaching; and as it appears to me
that you have the necessary skill and knowledge, I
shall retain a place for you at the northern exami-
nation: you will go and seek honour and reputation;
and if, young as you are, you should obtain a dis-
tinguished rank, that will most materially tend to
the accomplishment of your hopes. Then would be
the time to apply to Gou Touian, and entreat him to
play the part of a go-between. I shall then write
to him again, and I am confident we shall be com-
pletely successful. Let us not grieve that nothing
is as yet done. When you shall have acquired con-
sideration, your marriage will be half concluded.
You will obtain the height of your desires; all my
wishes will be gratified and every thing will turn
out in the most fortunate manner possible."
Perceiving that what his uncle said agreed per-
fectly well with the advice given him by Lo Mengli,
Sse Yeoupe felt like a man aroused from a dream,
and he eagerly answered : "Father, it is my duty
to follow your wise counsels."
A new voyage !--in which will be seen the dragon
and the tiger writing their names in the registry of
promotions, a family covered with glory, and the
male phonix in search of his mate.
Heaven appears to be sparing of honours and riches,
But men are particularly sensible to glory.
A treasure, no doubt, weighs in the balance,
But without the black scarf it would be but a trifling
advantage.
In the next chapter will be made known what
measures Sse Yeoupe took to acquire reputation.
114
JU-KIAO-LI:
CHAPTER XV.
SUCCESS AT THE AUTUMNAL, AND AT THE IM-
PERIAL SPRING EXAMINATION.
" What gives to man the immortality which the gods enjoy Not
draughts or the prescriptions of doctors. A poor student who gets an
employment, is happier than if the mysteries had been revealed to him
and he who is raised to dignity thinks himself transported to heaven.
The Hall of Jasper, the Golden Horse, are the true isles of the blessed.
The imperial banquet, the flowers which the conqueror receives in the
palace, are for him the philosopher's stone. Let no more be said of ages
passed in solitude by a hermit. The day in which honours are obtained
is worth a thousand years of life."
THE inspector-general Sse, and Sse Yeoupe, after
having agreed upon their plan, made choice of a
messenger to carry their despatches, and gave him
the money necessary to take him to court and retain
a place at the examination. These sort of persons
are generally skilful and steady; the one employed
upon the present occasion accomplished his mission
in a very short space of time.
Some days after, the inspector-general Sse, ad-
dressing Sse Yeoupe, said, "The multiplioity of
affairs transacted in my offices must confuse and
interrupt you. Since you now intend making a
name for yourself, I must send you immediately to
the capital; you will make choice of some quiet situ-
ation, where you may study without being disturbed.
This is, I think, the best thing you can do."
Sse Yeoupe, on his part, being also desirous to go
to the capital, in order to learn something of Dr Gou,
assented without hesitation to the proposal. The
day of his departure was fixed. The great and petty
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
115
officers of the department and canton came to pay him
their respects, and to offer him the farewell banquet.
Counsellor Li was not one of the last to shew his
zeal upon this occasion. After some days thus
passed in tumult and confusion, Sse Yeoupe took
leave of his uncle and resumed his journey. Sse
Yeoupe, now the son of a provincial judge, took
along with him, besides Siaohi, several officers his
horse was richly caparisoned, and on the road he
figured as a great personage, very different from the
poor bachelor who some time before travelled all
alone. He soon arrived in the capital, looked out
for a retired and quiet lodging, and at the same
time took the necessary steps to be admitted to the
examination, and also made inquiries about Dr Gou.
It unfortunately happened that the latter had been
nominated some days before to preside at an ex-
amination in the province of Houkouarig, and had al-
ready quitted the city. Sse Yeoupe was mortified by
this untoward circumstance; but seeing no remedy,
he recollected the advice of Lo Mengli, and devoted
himself to his studies, in order to advance himself
and succeed in his projects.
He felt the time pass rapidly and before he was
well aware of it, the period of the autumnal exa-
mination arrived. Sse Yeoupe presented himself
amongst an immense number of other persons.
Three sessions were held, and on the day of pro-
clamation the name of Sse Yeoupe was found upon
the list in the second rank of the new licentiates.
When the news of this success reached Chan-
toung, the inspector-general Sse felt the most
unutterable joy, and despatched a letter by ex-
press to Sse Yeoupe, recommending him strongly
116
JU-KIAO-LI:
not to quit the capital, but to seek in the mountains
to the east of the city for some retired convent,
where he might pursue in tranquillity his studies,
and prepare himself, against the spring, for the
examination which would entitle him to the degree
of doctor, and permit him to solicit a mission on
obtaining which, he might return to the province and
offer the accustomed sacrifices to his ancestors. By
this means he would avoid those repeated journeys,
which would otherwise waste his time and exhaust
his strength.
Sse Yeoupe, since his promotion, had thought of
nothing but returning to the south. But the com-
mands of his father, the desire to see Dr Gou, who
had not yet come back to the court, and the fear
that the degree of licentiate was not sufficient to
incline the lord Pe in his favour, determined him to
prolong his stay, and pass the winter in the capital.
At the commencement of the year all eyes were
turned towards the general spring examination.
Sse Yeoupe again entered the lists, and the most
complete success crowned his literary efforts. His
name, classed in the very highest rank, was found
the thirteenth in the list of doctors; and when the
examination took place in the palace, he was again
the first of the second series. Sse Yeoupe thus saw
himself marked out for the high appointments of
literature.
But it so happened, that at the examination held
the preceding autumn in the department of Chun-
thian *, when he had presented himself, there had
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
117
also appeared Tchinying, son to the minister of
state Tchinsiun, and Wanglun, the son of Wang-
wen. As neither of these young men obtained pro-
motion, their resentment was excited. They sent
in a complaint against the presidents of the exami-
nation, Lieouyan and Wangkian, alleging that these
two magistrates had not been impartial in their re-
view of the themes, and they therefore required that
they should be punished for their injustice. These
two young men contrived to interest Kaokou, the
under governor of the hereditary prince, in this
affair. It was represented to the emperor Kingthai,
that it was already an unfitting thing to see the
sons of men of dignity put upon the same line with
vulgar students ; but that it was still more reprehen-
sible that these latter should obtain the preference
from the presiding magistrates, in contravention of
the laws and orders of his majesty.
The emperor, easily discovering the truth, took
good care not to punish the presidents of the exami-
nation, but sharply repremanded the two young men
in private. He afterwards, by a special decree,
granted the title of licentiate to Tchinying and
Wanglun, and permitted them to present themselves
at the examination with the other candidates. At
this examination Lieouyan was again named presi-
dent of one of the sections to which Sse Yeoupe
belonged. The latter had been one of those chosen,
placed in an eminent rank, honoured with the first
place in the second series at the examination in the
palace, and rendered elegible to the high literary
appointments. The two young men, through hatred
of Lieouyan, made interest with the minister of the
household, and had Sse Yeoupe appointed a judge
118
JU-KIAO-LI
in the department of Hangtcheou, in the province of
Tchekiang.
On receiving intelligence of this, Sse Yeoupe, find-
ing himself in possession of a place, and at liberty
to quit the capital ; recollecting moreover, that as
Kinling was upon the road to Tchekiang, he could
easily, as he passed, go and see Pe, and make his
proposal of marriage,-felt the most entire satisfac-
tion instead of supposing that he had any reason to
complain. He determined therefore to wait only
till the inspector-general Sse came to court, to
render up an account of his mission, and then, after
having seen him, to set out immediately.
Before the inspector-general Sse's arrival, Dr
Gou returned to the capital, to receive the emperor's
orders. Sse Yeoupe was enraptured on learning
this circumstance, and hastened to pay him a visit,
leaving a card with his name and the title of his
office. Dr Gou was happy to find the name of Sse
Yeoupe on the list of those who had been promoted
at the general examination; but he gave the circum-
stance no further attention, when he observed that
the candidate was set down as being from the pro-
vince of Honan, which led him to suppose that it
must be another person of the family name and sur-
name. The day that Sse Yeoupe went to visit him,
the doctor was surprised to see upon the card the
word magistrate. He took care notto close the door
upon him, but eagerly went out to meet him, and
received him in the first saloon. As he saw Sse
Yeoupe approach, he was delighted at recognising
in him the handsome young man who had the pre-
ceding year composed some verses under the blos-
soming plum-trees; and, quite certain that his eyes
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
119
did not deceive him, he put on a smiling counte-
nance, and came forward to the stair-case to meet
Sse Yeoupe. As soon as the latter perceived him,
he bowed profoundly, and saluted him in a manner
the most proper to testify his respect. Both seated
themselves, after the usual compliments ; and the
doctor, commencing the conversation, said-' Sir,
your eldest brother was kind enough to pay me a
visit last year, and I heard from him, while he par-
took of a little collation at my house, that you could
notdo me the honour of coming to see me with him,
because you were then in retirement in the country,
preparing for the examination of the south. Why,
sir, have you changed your resolution ? And how
comes it that, on presenting yourself at the examina-
tion of the north, in the capital, you set yourself
down as a candidate from the province of Honan?"
Sse Yeoupe extremely surprised at what he bad
heard, said: "My. father and mother were taken
from me at a very early age. I am the only one
of my family, and have neither a younger nor elder
brother. Since last spring, when I had the misfortune
to incur your excellency's disapprobation, I have
been wandering in various provinces. In passing
through the kingdoms of Tsi and Lou* I met by
chance my paternal uncle, who, having no children,
and seeing me an orphan, has condescended to re-
ceive me into his house, and adopt me for his son.
This is what led me to the examination in the capi-
tal of the north. As to my having set myself down
as from the province of Honan, I had a right to do
so, through my father."
120
JU-KIAO-LI:
" Is not your uncle his excellency the lord Sse
Fanghoei?"
" The same," replied Sse Yeoupe.
" If such be the case, and if you have no
brother, who was the person who came, last year,
to entreat of me to speak in your favour to Pe
Thaihiouan ?"
Sse Yeoupe, very much confused, said," It is
very true that I had such an intention, but I charged
no one to make the request of your lordship. Can
your lordship recollect the name of that man?"
" All that I can recollect is, that he told me
he was your brother; but I have forgotten his title
and his surname." He then sent for the servant who
kept the list of the visiting cards, and found that
the person in question was named Sse Yeoute.
Sse Yeoupe, laughing, and his mouth half open
from surprise, exclaimed, " What ! Sse Yeoute ?"
Then heaving a sigh, he said, " Oh, how difficult it
is to sound the heart of man!"
" What do you mean by that ?" asked the
doctor.
"Last spring," replied Sse Yeoupe, "I had been
detained some time in the village of Kinchi : se-
cretly enamoured of the talent of Miss Pe, your
niece, I aspired to the possession of the water-
lentil and the alisma* ; but none of the expedients
I resorted to succeeded. I was afterwards informed
that the only effectual recommendation would be
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
121
that of your excellency ; I determined therefore to
come to court to implore your assistance. On my
way I met by chance Sse Yeoute, who by force of en-
treaty kept me with him for some time. He inquired
about the motives of my journey: in a moment of
indiscretion I frankly told him what it was-he-
learned from my own mouth all my intentions. He
immediately assured me that your excellency had
been called to court, and that it would be useless for
me to go to your house. He earnestly advised me
to proceed to the capital, and even furnished me
with the money necessary for my travelling expenses.
This act of kindness at the time inspired me with
gratitude; I crossed the river immediately after, and
directed my course towards the north. I had then
no suspicion that he was acting towards me with
the most signal duplicity, and that he intended to
go and practise a thousand impostures upon your
excellency. But I am still ignorant of the answer
you thought proper to make him."
" When I learned your wishes, I wrote immedi-
ately to my relative," replied the doctor : then, after
stopping to laugh, he continued, " I now see how
the case is ; the object that you refused when it was
offered to you, you now travel a hundred leagues to
solicit."
"How is that ?" asked Sse Yeoupe with sim-
plicity.
" Last year," replied the doctor, "Pe Thaihiouan
was sent upon a mission into Tartary. Out of his
extreme caution he confided to me the care of his
daughter, my niece. During an excursion which I
took to the temple of the Valley of Immortals, to
see the plum-trees in blossom, I had occasion to
122
JU-KIAO-LI:
remark the superiority of your poetical talent, and
your external advantages. I then conceived the
idea, in order to justify my relative's confidence, of
uniting you to my niece. It was that very niece
whom you then, for what reason I know not, so
obstinately refused, and whom you now, for what
motive I am ignorant, seek with so much earnest-
ness. Have I not then reason to say that you
travel a hundred leagues to solicit what you had
refused when it was offered to you?"
Sse Yeoupe remained for some time confounded.
When he recovered his speech, he reiterated several
times his excuses It is just," said he, that I
should reap the fruits of my own conduct. I was
like a man asleep in open day; though surrounded
by the marks of your kind partiality towards me, I
remained ignorant of it. This is really the last de-
gree of stupidity."
" It was by no means your fault," replied the
doctor; " but happiness is always beset with ob-
stacles."
"I should think little of the obstacles," said Sse
Yeoupe; but what I fear is, that this miserable
Sse Yeoute has, aided by the powerful support of
your excellency's letter, already succeeded. If such
should be the case, what is to be done ?
" It is not possible," replied the doctor; my rela-
tive Pe is a very enlightened and extremely circum-
spect man. He will not let himself be duped by a
knave under a supposed name; but even should my
relative yield a too easy faith to his representations,
my niece, who has so much intellect, and whose
eyes are so piercing, will never allow herself to be
hurried into the snare. It is therefore gratuitously,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
123
sir, that you alarm yourself with such chimeras
you should make your mind perfectly tranquil.
Leave your cause in my hands-I answer for its
success."
Sse Yeoupe hastened to acknowledge this as-
surance by a profound obeisance. "I entirely rely
upon your excellency," said he, "to complete the
good work that you have so well begun. I have
no doubt as to the result of your kindness."
After having taken three cups of tea, and con-
tinued for some time longer the conversation upon
indifferent subjects, Sse Yeoupe took leave and
went away.
The cormorant hid under the snow is discovered when
he takes flight
The parrot perched upon a willow is found out when he
speaks.
The explanation given by doctor Gou to Sse
Yeoupe, caused him much regret. " If I had sooner
known that there was fire in the lantern," said he
to himself, " the rice should have been cooked
long before this. In consequence of not having
taken in good time more exact information, I have
lost the opportunity that offered itself to me; and
now I am wandering from east to west in search of
assistance, without being able to foresee what will
be the decision of fate."
" Every one talks in terms of praise of Miss Pe's
charms," continued he ; " these praises cannot be
meant to deceive. She whom I formerly saw at the
bottom of the garden was not however handsome.
Could I have had a film on my eyes at that moment,
or did I consider with too little attention ?"
He continued his reflections. I have heard it
124
JU-KIAO-LI:
said that he had himself a daughter, who has con-
tracted an engagement. It was probably her that
I saw but of this I cannot yet be certain."
These ideas caused some incertitude in the mind of
Sse Yeoupe. A short time afterwards, the inspector-
general Sse arrived to take the orders of the em-
peror. The father and son felt extreme pleasure in
again seeing each other. "Now your reputation and
your destiny are fixed," said Sse; " nothing now
remains but the marriage. I shall pay a visit to
Gou Touian to-morrow, and entreat him to lend us
his support. I shall also write myself, and I see no
reason why the business should not succeed."
The thoughts that occupied Sse Yeoupe, made
him quicken his preparations for his journey. The
inspector-general, who observed his extreme im-
patience, was unwilling to increase it by detaining
him any longer so that, after a few days, he gave
him permission to depart. A great number of
young men of his own age, and magistrates belonging
to the province of Tchekiang, accompanied him out
of town, and offered him the farewell banquet; but
their polite attentions made a very slight impression
on him.
He came without a cap or parasol,
He returns in a chariot with a retinue and horses:
He is still the self-same person,
But how different is the reception given him!
On quitting the gates of the capital, Sse Yeoupe
was to have gone into the province of Honan, to offer
a propitiatory sacrifice to his ancestors. But, as
he wished to see Lo Mengli, he told his uncle that
he would go to Honan through the province of
Chantoung. His servants ventured to make no
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
125
observation, but took the road to Chantoung. After
ten days' march, they reached the littletown of Tseou.
Sse Yeoupe ordered his servants to wait for him
outside the town; and taking with him only Siaohi,
and in the very same clothes he had worn when
last there, he entered the town, to make the desired
inquiries. Having arrived in a short time before
the house of Lo, he observed that there was a large
padlock upon the principal gate, with two strong
straps of leather fixed cross-wise upon it; he also
remarked that a perfect solitude reigned all around.
This sight gave him great trouble and to escape
from the suspicions that agitated him, he went
round the house to look at the back-door of the
garden ; but he found this door also closed, and
secured with a padlock and two leathern straps.
This served only to augment his surprise and in-
quietude. " What can this mean?" he exclaimed.
Or am I under the influence of a dream ?"
He then considered with more attention the ob-
jects that surrounded him : the large white stone
upon which he had formerly sat with Lo Mengli, was
still before the door; the trees planted in the neigh-
bourhood, the prospect, the air of the whole place,
were the same as before. But the beloved being,-
in what place was he ? Sse Yeoupe found himself
exactly in the same situation as Lieouwon, when he
returned to Thiantai.
While Sse Yeoupe abandoned himself to his re-
flections and fears, the servants of counsellor Li,
who all knew him, and who had seen him pass before
the gate of the next house, went secretly to inform
their master. The latter, who already knew that Sse
Yeoupe had been promoted to the degree of doctor,
126
JU-KIAO-LI:
felt the greatest desire to receive him in his house.
He sent servants out in every direction to invite him,
and he himself opened the back-door of the garden
to let him in. He perceived Sse Yeoupe standing
near the garden-door belonging to the house of
Lo, apparently absorbed in his own thoughts.
He hastened towards him, and saluting him with
great respect, said, "I have not yet been able to
go and felicitate you upon your success; it is a
fault of which I confess myself guilty. But since
you have come to-day into my neighbourhood,
what detains you in this place-why do you not
come and honour me with a look?
Sse Yeoupe promptly replied to his polite address.
" I was on the point of going to ask for you,"
said he "chance brought me to this spot, and
I stopped, I know not why, to view this pro-
spect, which I have seen before. But, my lord, why
have you deigned to disturb yourself so much as
to come forth thus, and give me so honourable a
welcome
When he finished speaking, counsellor Li in-
duced Sse Yeoupe to pass into the garden. After
they had entered it, they recommenced their salu-
tations and this duty fulfilled, counsellor Li ordered
the table to be laid, as he wished to offer a collation
to his guest. He also sent a servant to invite the
licentiate Tsian to come and join them. Sse Yeoupe,
whose object was to get some information about
Lo Mengli, stood upon no further ceremony. A
few moments after the table was covered, the licen-
tiate arrived; and after the usual compliments and
a desultory conversation, they took their seats at
the board. After a certain time, Sse Yeoupe, ad-
OR THE TWO COUSINS.
127
dressing counsellor Li, said, " When I slept here
last year, I met at the garden-gate the son of the
owner of the next house, Lo, a very young man.
What is the reason that the garden-gate is locked
and sealed up, and that no person is to be seen in
the house? You are next door neighbour, my lord
Li, and should know the cause."
"That," replied the counsellor, "is the house
of the lord Lo, the sub-intendant, surnamed Yi-
houng; but the lord Lo is dead. His son is a
child who may be about five or six years of age.
There are no other persons in the house except
the lady, who 'lives in a state of widowhood,
and her young daughter. Of what young man
do you speak? You must be under a mistake,
my lord."
"There is no doubt of my having met him, for I
conversed a long time with him. How then can I
be mistaken? Might it not have been a nephew, or
some other member of the family, who had been on
a visit there at the moment?"
" The lord Lo was himself the founder of his
house," replied the counsellor. "His family was
originally very obscure; I have never heard any
mention made of his relations, near or distant. Be-
sides, the lord Lo was, when living, of a solitary and
reserved disposition; he saw very little company.
His widow belongs to a family of magistrates in
Kiangnan; her father and brother live a great dis-
tance from this; her house was regulated upon a
footing of the strictest severity, and she would not
suffer any young male relation to sojourn in it. It
was probably some person of the neighbourhood,
128
JU-KIAO-LI:
who presented himself to you under the name of
young Lo, in order to ask you for something."
"This gentleman, so far from making a demand
on me, shewed me the greatest kindness ; 1 saw
him very distinctly come out of the garden and re-
enter it. How then could it have been a person
not belonging to the house? This is a very extra-
ordinary occurrence."
"Did you ask him his name and surname ?" in-
quired the counsellor.
' His name is Mengli," replied Sse Yeoupe.
After a moment's reflection the counsellor said,
" Mengli? These two syllables resemble very much
the name given by the nurse to the daughter of the
house." Then laughing, he added, "Might it not
have been the young lady who was with you ?"
Sse Yeoupe laughed and replied-" As the son
is an infant, and as there is no young man in the
house, let us say no more about it. But I pray you
to tell me why the front and back gates are sealed
up and fastened with padlocks, as the lady of the
house and her daughter no longer exist?"
"The lady and her daughter are still living,"
replied the counsellor.
" If living, where are they ?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
" About fifteen days ago they went on a pilgrim-
age to the sea-coast of the south," replied the
counsellor; "and as nobody was left in the house,
the doors were secured and sealed up."
" If they went only on a pilgrimage to the sea-
coast of the south, why did the whole household,
without any exception, accompany them? I imagine
there must be some other cause."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
129
The licentiate then took a part in the conversa-
tion. "The pilgrimage is only a pretext," said he
" there is, in fact, another cause, of which I have
heard some talk, but am not fully acquainted with
its nature."
Dare I request of you to tell me what you have
heard," replied Sse Yeoupe.
The licentiate, addressing the counsellor, said,
My lord, have you never heard speak of this?"
" If there be any other reason, I am totally un-
acquainted with it," replied the counsellor.
" I have heard," resumed the licentiate, " that
the lord Lo had a personal enemy, who has lately
obtained a high situation in the magistracy, and
who, on learning the death of the lord Lo, had re-
solved to take vengeance upon his family. The
lady Lo has therefore only pretended this pilgrim-
age, in order to escape from the persecutions with
which she is menaced."
And is it not known whither she is gone?" asked
Sse Yeoupe.
" As her relations are magistrates in Kiangnan,
she has no doubt gone back to her family, who in-
habit that province."
Sse Yeoupe was confounded by this intelligence,
and remained for a moment as if deprived of rea-
son and consciousness. He was, however, ob-
liged to overcome his trouble of mind, and reply
to the healths that were proposed. They con-
tinued drinking the half of the day, till Sse
Yeoupe's servant arrived, when he took leave
of messieurs Li and Tsian, and rose up to quit
them.
130
JU-KIAO-LI:
We recollect with pleasure the delightful breath of the
vernal breeze,
The recollections of the past, the fears of the future,
Are so many demons that weigh upon our hearts.
After having quitted his two companions, Sse
Yeoupe ordered his servants to go in the direction
of Honan. During the whole of the way he
abandoned himself to his reflections. Here in
my sleeve," said he to himself, " are the bracelets
and pearls which young Lo gave me; but where is
he himself? Since this lady and her daughter are
flying from persecution, they of course will not
think of returning soon. There are many families
of magistrates in Kiangnan. Where can I seek for
information ? He did, indeed, tell me, that on
my return it would be uncertain if we should again
see each other. This presentiment was but too well
founded. But since there was an obstacle to our
re-union, why did he not forego the pleasure of our
first meeting ? What a misfortune to have seen
each other, to have become so intimately con-
nected, to have separated so precipitately, and to
have gained nothing by this meeting, but a subject of
affliction and regret ""
Another train of reflection then presented itself
to his mind. He assured me," said he to him-
self, " that after my marriage with Miss Pe, the
affair of which we spoke would follow of itself.
This young Lo appeared to me a person of sense
and understanding; his language had probably
a hidden meaning, which I have not yet been
able to discover. 1 had best confide in his pro-
mises, and go and conclude my marriage with
Miss Pe.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
131
We rejoice to see each other,
We are sad at parting :
The duration of joy is well known,
But the cause of inquietude is to know how long sorrow
will last.
We shall here leave Sse Yeoupe to continue his
journey, occupied with his reflections, and speak
of Pe, who since his illness had not quitted
his house, or received any visitors, but passed his
time in solitude, composing verses with his daugh-
ter. After the examination in the provinces of the
south, he had looked over the lists, and could not
find the name of Sse Yeoupe ; but he afterwards
discovered it as second upon the list of Chunthian;
however, his being set down as a candidate from
Honan, threw him into great perplexity. " May it
not be," said he to himself, "that Sse Yeoupe,
after having been deprived of his first degree, put
down his name amongst the candidates of the
north?" But making a second reflection, he said,
"This might account for his name being inscribed,
but the name of his birth-place could not be
changed. It must therefore be some one else, who
bears the same name." After this conclusion, he
ceased to think on the subject.
In the spring of the following year a new train
of thought occurred to him. "I have now," said
he to himself, "been many years looking for a son-
in-law. The only one that satisfies me is Sse
Yeoupe ; but the print of his footsteps has disap-
peared upon the surface of the waves. I know not
where to find him; my daughter is now eighteen
years of age, and it is time to settle her in the
world; there- is, in fact, not a moment to be lost.
G 6
132
JU-KIAO-LI:
I have been told that Wanlin, upon the Western
Lake, is generally frequented by all the poets and
wits of the empire. I shall take advantage of the
fine days of spring, to make a little excursion there,
myself. It will be a recreation for my old age; and
by some means or other I shall make choice of a
son-in-law of merit, and at length establish my
daughter Houngiu. The only thing that grieves
me, is to leave her alone in the house behind me."
This consideration detained him some days, when
it was unexpectedly announced to him that Mrs
Lo, of the province of Chantoung, with her daughter
and young son, followed by her servants, had ar-
rived. and were waiting at the gate. How is
that ?" cried Pe in the greatest astonishment : and
he immediately ordered the sedan chairs of Mrs Lo
and her daughter to be brought into the inner court,
and the servants and persons belonging to her
suite to be lodged in the front apartments.
This Mrs Lo was Pe's own sister. The sedan
chairs having been immediately brought into the
inner court, Pe and his daughter went to receive
Mrs Lo. The lord Pe and Mrs Lo began first to
perform the salutations befitting an elder brother
and a younger sister. Afterwards, Miss Lo and
the young boy paid the respects due to a maternal
uncle. "Nephew and niece," said he to them, " it
is many years since 1 saw you: you have both grown
very much." These compliments being over, Miss
Pe acquitted herself, in her turn, of the duty she
owed to her aunt Lo; and afterwards the two
young girls and the boy saluted each other recipro-
cally. After all these ceremonies, they sat down;
and Pe, addressing his sister, said, "The great dis-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
133
tance that separated us, has prevented me from
hearing anything about you for a long time back;
what circumstance has induced you to come here
with your household?"
" When your brother-in-law was employed in the
province of Kiangii," replied Mrs Lo, " there
was at Kinkou a sub-prefect, who shewed, in the
exercise of his office, great rapacity and severity :
your brother-in-law denounced him-he was brought
to judgment, and deprived of his place. I know
not how it happened, but he afterwards contrived
to obtain another sub-prefecture, and has even been
appointed to the situation of inspector-general. On
learning that your brother-in-law had quitted this
world, his former resentment awoke in his heart;
and as he has just been named judge of the province
of Chantoung, he would of course, not fail to make
us feel his vengeance. How could a poor widow such
as I, and your niece, who is still so young, make
head against him in a province where we have no
friends ? My daughter and I, after discussing the
matter, and before he had set foot within the limits
of the province, pretended a pilgrimage to the sea-
coast of the south; and in order to escape his per-
secutions, we have come, brother, to ask you per-
mission to pass some time in your house.."
"Such being the state of things, you have acted
perfectly right," said Pe. " It is but the power of
a moment, and all that is necessary is, to quit the
sphere of evil-disposed persons of that kind be-
sides, you have arrived here very apropos, sister. I
was just thinking of making an excursion to Wan-
lin; and the only thing that withheld me, was the
necessity of leaving your niece alone in the house,
134
JU-KIAO-LI:
without any person to watch over her. Now that
you are here, sister, you can assist her with your
advice, and my niece will keep her company. I
shall now go this journey with a mind at ease."
"Since I am here, and I can keep my niece
company, there is no longer any obstacle to your
departure, brother," said Mrs Lo. "But, besides
escaping persecution, our journey has another mo-
tive, with regard to which I must trouble you."
"
What other motive ?" asked Pe.
Since your brother-in-law quitted this world,
our house has fallen into neglect. Your niece is
now seventeen years of age, and is not yet be-
trothed; not but several persons have proposed for
her; but widow as I am, I had little opportunity for
seeing society, and I felt some difficulty in fixing
my resolution. I am therefore come along with
her, to entreat you, as her uncle, to choose a good
husband for her, to bring to a conclusion an affair
that will influence her whole life."
On hearing this, Pe sighed. " It is a very diffi-
cult task to make choice of a son-in-law," said he.
What a deal of trouble has not the marriage of
Houngiu given me ? And yet I have not been able
to find a person to my liking. To a woman in your
situation such a choice must have been still more
embarrassing. Since you put your confidence in
me, I shall leave nothing undone to justify it.
I
see that my niece has a very pretty face, and an
elegant and graceful figure. She, no doubt, ex-
cels in all the works peculiar to her sex."
" She understands tolerably well whatever ap-
pertains to embroidery, carpet-making, and other
works of the needle and the fingers; but her taste
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
135
is of another description. The only occupation
she really delights in is literature. When at home,
she is always either writing or composing verses
from her infancy till the present moment, she has
had constantly a book of some kind or other in her
hand. Her father, when living, used to say, that
she had a clever mind, and he took a pleasure in
making her compose. I know not if what she
writes is good or bad; but, brother, when you
have a moment to spare, you will examine her."
Pe was both surprised and delighted at hearing
this account. "Ah! she loves literature!" he
said; "in that case she will take pleasure in the
society of Houngiu." Although making use of
this language, Pe nevertheless thought that she
might have some knowledge of letters without be-
ing deeply versed in them.
After this conversation, Pe ordered his servants
to prepare, in the inner court, three large pavilions
for the use of Mrs Lo, her son, and daughter.
Their baggage was carried there, and the persons
of the suite were distributed in various apartments
in the front part of the house. Preparations were
then made for a banquet to celebrate the meeting
of the family.
In a short time the banquet was ready. There
were two tables : Mrs Lo sat at one end of the table,
on the left, with her son and daughter at each side;
and Pe sat at one end of the table to the right, with
his daughter at the side. The brother and sister
talked, as they drank, over the family affairs. After
some time, Mrs Lo, addressing Miss Pe, said,
" You are, niece, seventeen years of age, I believe,
this year?"
136
JU-KIAO-LI 2
"I am eighteen," replied Miss Pe.
" You are then a year older than Mengli," re-
plied Mrs Lo ; " you are really a woman."
"I have had all my life a taste for wine and
poetry," said Pe; "and as I was denied the advan-
tage of a son, my greatest pleasure was to send for
your niece, every evening, and make her compose
with me. This was my favourite recreation at the
close of the day. 1 am agreeably surprised- at
learning that my niece has, also, a taste for litera-
ture ;" then, addressing himself to Miss Mengli,
he said, If you have anything, be it in verse or
prose, will you do me the favour to let me hear you
recite it ?"
"I have some pieces of verse that I composed
formerly," replied Lo Mengli ; "but they relate to
past circumstances, and are not worth the trouble
of being repeated. But have the goodness to give
me your instructions, uncle; point out, I beg of
you, a subject to me; and your niece Mengli will
submit to you her feeble essays, in order that
you and Miss Pe may teach her how to correct
them."
This proposal pleased Pe. "Yes, that will do
better," said he; " but you must not compose alone,
I desire that Houngiu may compose something at
the same time."
"Should Miss Pe do me the favour to write along
with me," said Miss Lo, "I shall then have before
my eyes a model by which to regulate myself, and
I shall endeavour to profit by it."
Pe, entertaining still some doubts as to Miss Lo's
skill, thought that if he gave them both the same
subject to treat, the difference of talent might be too
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
137
evident, and the result of the comparison, an unplea-
sant one. " It is better," thought he, "that each
should write upon a different subject; then, if there
be any inequality, it will not be so obvious. A friend
whom met a few days ago at Kinling," continued
he, 'gave me two subjects that may serve at pre-
sent; one is the Sighs of an Old Maid, the other,
the Song of the Clapping of Hands*. He told
me that there was not one of the celebrated poets
at Kinling that had not written upon them. Why
will you not take them, young ladies, and each write
some verses on them?'
"I am willing to do so," said Miss Lo; " but I
beg of you, uncle, to distribute them."
"That is not difficult," replied Pe; and having
asked Yansou for pens, ink-stand, and two sheets
of flowered paper, he wrote upon one The Sighs of
an Old Maid, and upon the other, The Song of the
Clapping of Hands, noting underneath, that each
piece should have four strophes, and that the song
should be written in regular verse. When he had
finished writing, he folded down the side upon which
the subject was written, so that it could not be seen;
and having shuffled them for a moment, he laid
the two sheets of paper upon the table, saying,
" Now, young ladies, take each of you, without
choosing, one of these sheets."
The two young girls rose up eagerly, took each
a sheet, and unfolded it, to see what had fallen to
her lot. Miss Pe found that what she had got
138
JU-KIAO-LI:
was, The Sighs of an Old Maid, and Miss Lo The
Song of the Clapping of Hands.
As it was a constant amusement of Pe's to make
his daughter compose verses, her attendants knew
what was to be done on the occasion; and on seeing
the two young girls take each a subject of com-
position, they brought and laid before them some
pens and two ink-stands. Both then, desirous of
displaying their talents, sought, the one to paint
the whiteness of snow, the other to animate her
style with all the ardour of spring. It was then
that the ink might have been seen falling confusedly,
under the form of flowers, upon the two sheets
spread out to receive it, while the pens flew up
and down, backwards, and forwards. In less than
an instant both had finished their four strophes.
The rapidity of their pens outstrips the wind.
The verses polished by them would make the genii
blush.
This talent, which might immortalize poets,
Was found one day to belong to two fair ones.
Both young girls finished their pieces of verse
exactly at the same moment, and presented them
simultaneously to Pe, who was a little surprised
at observing that Miss Lo had written without the
slightest hesitation, and finished as soon as Miss
Pe. He first opened the paper given him by Miss
Lo, and read what follows:-
SONG.
THE CLAPPING OF HANDS.
Jealousy remains crouched in the midst of a shower of
flowers,
And the anger of a beautiful woman betrays itself in the
motion of her eye-brows.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
139
The goldfinch and the butterfly have not yet displayed
their rich colours : ;
And in so fine a day the golden needle remains still
inactive.
The succession of these purple tints amuses a simple heart:
It takes pleasure in beholding these carpets of verdure
which the season renews.
The lover'enjoys the privilege of commencing in a jesting
manner the game of chess,
And the fair one with the golden comb shews her im-
patience by striking the table with her hand.
But impatience and the actions that it inspires disturb
the peace of the soul
I prefer, by milder gestures, to make known my senti-
ments.
It will be the shadow of a cloud passing over a tissue of
a single colour,
Or the traces which the bamboo in spring leaves upon
the surface of jasper.
Discussions and mutual attacks will never cease :
But I fear not the most violent attacks.
May 1 finish my days in the happiness that I now feel!
The blossom of the pear-tree will in this asylum bid
adieu to the tree that has protected it.
Pe read these verses with the greatest attention
and when he saw that all the expressions were deli-
cate, elegant, and well chosen, he felt, in the bottom
of his heart, as much astonishment as satisfaction.
Then, addressing Mrs Lo, he said, " I imagined
that a young beauty might be able, by her acquire-
ments, to wash out the shame of paint and pomatum;
but I had no idea that my niece was endowed with
such fine talents. It is impossible to treat more
ingeniously a difficult subject." He then handed
the verses to Miss Pe. "See, my child," said he,
what grace and elegance are in this composition.
140
JU-KIAO-LI
It is a harmonious sound escaped from a box of
perfumes. You have now found an adversary
worthy of you."
On reading these verses, Miss Pe expressed her
admiration in uninterrupted praises. Miss Lo re-
ceived them with modesty, saying, "They are the
humble, ungraceful production of a poor orphan,
brought up in the obscurity of the women's apart-
ment. I fear that I have lost myself in the region
of phantoms ; I hope, uncle, that you and my sister
will have the kindness to set me right."
When she had ceased speaking, Pe took the
verses of Miss Pe, and, having unfolded the paper,
found what follows :-
THE SIGHS OF AN OLD MAID.
The spring has come to adorn our paths with purple-
tinted flowers,
And the pleasure of beholding them attracts crowds of
young girls.
Each year sees the flowers bloom and wither;
But there is a girl who is silent whilst looking at the
flowers.
Her silence is caused by a reflection suggested to her by
the flowers.
The reflection which troubles her heart remains un-
known to us all:
She recollects that the linnet is envious of the new
moon :
Already the hair on her temples rivals the flowers in
brilliancy.
Formerly she complained of the premature rigour of the
winds of autumn;
But now she has no longer the same delicate waist.
Alas ! this petticoat, once of as bright a red as the pome-
grenate,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
141
Equals no longer in freshness the blossom of the peach-
tree.
Months and years are passed in bewailing her forlorn
state:
How often does she return to her mirror to seek for the
image that she saw in it formerly !
The young women of the neighbourhood avoid meeting
her:
Alone and abandoned to herself, she appears to us an
object most worthy of pity.
After the perusal of these verses, Pe exclaimed :
" Ingenious obscurity and delicate reserve! Nothing
fully expressed, and yet the meaning is marvellously
clear. That is absolutely the manner of the good
times of the dynasty of the Thangs
My niece
and you merit equal praise, and it cannot be said
which is the hand that has killed the stag."
He ordered Yansou to hand the verses to Miss
Lo. She, having read them with attention, thus ex-
pressed her admiration, " Ab, sister, what a beautiful
composition! Both the matter and the manner are
excellent. It is truly fire without smoke; when
compared to this, mine is like a paper cut with a
hatchet, and shaved with a plane. With such
talent," she continued to herself, " it is no wonder
that she has inspired young Sse with so lively a
passion."
These two pieces of poetry increased the esteem
and affection which these two young girls felt for
each other as relations.
When talent meets with talent,
Friendship soon springs up between them.
142
JU-KIAO-L1:
Deep as may be the attachment of relatives,
It is at bottom only relationship.
In the next chapter will be seen what was the
conduct of the two cousins.
CHAPTER XVI.
MUTUAL CONFIDENCE OF TWO AMIABLE COUSINS.
" Let it not be said that the two young girls cannot live together :
in a thousand years perhaps there may not be found two others whose
minds are so congenial. It must not be forgotten that Ying and Hoang
lived and died together and man and son never dissolved the ties of
relationship. What matters it that sympathy has been feeble in the
commencement? Love, once born, can never become extinct. Of what
nse is the voracious fury of buzzards disputing their prey ? The vulgar
alone are destined never to know the sweets of the union of the teals."
SINCE Pe had become convinced by his own obser-
vation of the poetical talents of Miss Lo, his heart
was filled with the most lively satisfaction. I have
made fruitless researches in every direction to find
a man endowed with true merit," said he ; " and
behold, in the bosom of my own family there ap-
pears a girl so abundantly provided withit, as to be
worthy of being compared to Houngiu. But if it
has been already so difficult to find one son-in-law,
what trouble shall I not now have to discover two?
Let us take advantage of the genial season of
spring; let us make an excursion to Wanlin, the
rendezvous of all the men of letters. Who knows but
there I may find means to conclude our marriages ?"
After having fully explained his intentions to
Mrs Lo, and also to the Misses Houngiu and Mengli,
he ordered his servants to get ready a bark, a
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
143
chariot, and the baggage, and then he made his
own particular preparations for the journey. Miss
Houngiu could not refrain from again renewing her
representations: "Though my aunt is here to watch
over the house," said she, " yet you, father, have
no one to accompany you on the road; return soon,
I beseech you."
Pe promised to do as she desired, and a few days
afterwards he set out for Wanlin, followed by his
servants. Since Miss Pe had discovered in her
cousin, with a face like the flowers, talent and senti-
ments pure as snow, she conceived for this young
girl the tenderest affection. On her part Miss Lo,
who recognised in Miss Pe a poetical genius of the
highest order, with a character and exterior superior
to any that was to be seen in the rest of the world,
felt for her a most profound esteem. Every day
they mutually excited each other to celebrate the
singularities of nature, and subject their inspirations
to the yoke of metre and rhyme. Under flowering
arbours during a serene day, or by the light of
lanterns during the mild evenings, these two young
girls were found together, as inseparably united as
are the substance and the shadow. There reigned
in their conversations the most happy accord, and
the most perfect coincidence marked their manner
of thinking. One day at the commencement of the
new season, Miss Pe, dressed in a simple robe,
whose colour corresponded with the tints of the
spring, made Yanson take up a large mirror; and,
holding in her own hand another, she placed herself
at the bottom of the trellis-work, and so disposed
the two mirrors that she could see all those who
entered. While she was thus employed, Miss Lo
144
JU-KIAO-LI:
gently approached, and seeing what she was doing,
smiled and said, " Oh ! sister, you wish to keep
to yourself all the subjects for poetry which offer
themselves in the inner apartment! But this very
spectacle itself would furnish a fine subject."
Dear sister," replied Miss Pe, "if you will
not allow me to keep all the subjects to myself,
and if you find this one to your taste, give us a
piece of poetry, if you please; and you shall have
your full share of this amusement."
of
Truly," said Miss Lo, " I should like to share
it with you; only that I fear, when I should take my
eyes off the beautiful person who now attracts them,
they would rest upon objects less worthy to inspire
me: what then am I to do ?"
" If it were in your power to confer degrees,
you would soon make a doctor of me," said Miss
Pe. " Let me only be re-born with a beard on my
chin, and I shall have no cause for inquietude."
Miss Lo began to laugh, and immediately went
in search of a piece of paper and pens, and in a
very short time presented to Miss Pe the verses she
had composed. The following was the poem,
written in verses of five syllables:
UPON A BEAUTIFUL WOMAN
MAKING USE OF A MIRROR TO OBSERVE WHAT WAS PASSING
BENEATH HER WINDOW-BLINDS.
Her toilette finished it is not her face that she delights
in looking at;
Standing before her mirror, she is observing what passes
beneath her window-blinds.
The reflected image offers itself to her sight,
And her stolen glance seizes the rays of light that strike it.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
145
It is the blossom of the pear-tree turning in the spring
towards the disk of the moon.
It is the branches of the willow, inclining, in a beautiful
evening, towards the surface of the pond.
She was possessed already of charms sufficient to seduce
all mankind :
What necessity to add to them the piquant air of these
contracted eye-brows?
Miss Pe was enchanted with these verses, What
grace and complacency !" she exclaimed. "These
verses are worthy of the most celebrated poets.
Ah, sister, if you were a young man, I should wish
to have you, all my life, as near me as my cap and
my comb."
At these words Miss Lo frowned, and remained
for some time without speaking. "Then," said she
at length, " because I am not a young man, you
wish me far away from you. This expression
announces on your part an affection of little depth."
" Sister, you take in a wrong sense what I have
said," replied Miss Pe laughing; "for I have the
warmest affection for you, for your person and your
talents. I should wish to pass my whole life with
you; but I fear that it is not possible; and the ex-
pression of regret that I made use of had no other
origin than that of fear. In what way does my affec-
tion for you appear to want depth?"
" It entirely depends upon ourselves to pass our
lives together," said Miss Lo : " it must be our
own wishes that will decide it. If we both desire
it, who can prevent us? What makes you suppose
it impossible?
What makes me think it impossible, sister,"
replied Miss Pe," is the fear that you do not really
146
JU-KIAO-LI :
desire it. If you do, there is no necessity for your
becoming a young man. If I had not desired it,
I should not have expressed the wish that you had
been one."
This answer restored Miss Lo's good humour.
" I have not to reproach myself with want of affec-
tion for you," said she; " and it was truly ridiculous
on my part to have conceived any doubts as to the
solidity of yours. But something remains still to
be said. Although there is between us no motive
to prevent our living together, yet there exists a
condition, without which our separation would be
inevitable. Now I do not know, sister, if this con-
dition would be to your taste."
" We learn," replied Miss Pe, " that in former
times Hoang and Niuying devoted themselves to
Chun. I should like very well to imitate them.
Would that be also your wish, sister?"
" If it were not my wish, I should not have come
here," replied Miss Lo in a transport of joy.
" I should not dare to make any comparison,
with regard to merit or beauty, between us and Ying
and Hoang," said Miss Pe; "however, these he-
roines, so celebrated in ancient times, ornaments of
the women's apartments, comparable to the breeze
of the forests, did not'blush to contract a similar
union. But I know not if, in the world as it now
exists, it would be possible to find a man sufficiently
gifted with talent, to be worthy to receive us both."
Miss Lo remained for some time buried in
thought. "Sister," said she at length, " you have
consented that we should have but one heart.
Let us then speak with perfect sincerity. Why
conceal anything from each other?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
147
" We have poured our hearts into each other,"
replied Miss Pe ; " what therefore can we have to
conceal from each other ?"
" If you conceal nothing from me," said Miss
Lo, " tell me then if he who has touched your
heart, sister, be a man so devoid of merit, that it
becomes necessary to seek for another ?"
Miss Pe, laughing, said : " What foolish story is
this you are telling, sister ? Without saying that
nobody has touched my heart, suppose it to be
true, where could you have learned it?"
Miss Lo burst into a loud laugh. " It is a true
saying," said she, " that the only way to prevent
an action, which one is desirous to conceal, from
being known, is not to do it. The fact is, that the
conduct and proceedings of a man of talent and a
beautiful woman attract the eyes and ears of every
one, and become, during an infinite time, the subject
of interesting communications. Though I live a
great distance from hence, the whole of that affair
has been known to me for a long time."
Miss Pe did not give credit to this assertion.
" Why do you not at once tell what you do know?"
replied she. "You have probably heard some fool-
ish story with regard to Tchangfanjou, and the
verses upon the vernal willows?"
" Every one knows that adventure," replied Miss
Lo, laughing; "I am not the only one who has
heard it. What I know does not relate to Tchang,
who presented some verses upon the vernal willows
under his own name; but it relates to a lord Sse, the
author of these verses, and moreover of The Fare-
well to the Crane, and The Welcome of the Swallow."
On hearing this disclosure of the secret senti-
148
JU-KIAO-LI:
ments of her heart, Miss Pe was so confounded and
disconcerted that she could not utter a word, but
she directed her looks towards Yansou.
" We are sisters, and have but one heart," re-
sumed Miss Lo; " why then this inquietude and
these suspicions? Why wear such an expression
of countenance ?"
After a moment's surprise and hesitation, Miss
Pe, feeling that this assertion was well founded,
could no longer dissemble, but said, " You are,
sister, very clever; but the business of which you
speak is known only to me and Yansou. I have
not dared to speak of it even in my dreams. How
then should you have learned it ? It must be some
one of my women who has played the spy upon me
in the privacy of my apartment, and has afterwards
secretly gone to inform you of the fact."
Miss Lo began to laugh. "Sister," replied she,
the genii themselves could not have penetrated
your secret. How then can you suppose that any
mortal could discover it? I have heard it from
young Mr Sse, whose own lips conveyed it to my
ear. None but he could have known it; you there-
fore should have no suspicion on the subject."
"You are jesting with me," said Miss Pe. It
is now nearly a year since young Mr Sse quitted
this part of the country. My father has made in-
quiries in I know not how many places, without
being able to get any information respecting him,
or learn in what direction he has turned his steps.
But even should he have gone into Chantoung,
how is it possible, sister, that a young and beauti-
ful person like you, inhabiting the inner apartment,
could have found yourself in his company ?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
149
" Your doubts are natural," replied Miss Lo
" and yet it is true that I have seen Mr Sse, and
conversed with him about your affairs. I have
no intention to impose upon you by unfounded
assertions."
" What you tell me is neither natural nor pro-
bable. How can you expect me to give credit to
it ?" asked Miss Pe.
" It is natural that you should not give credit to
it at present; but another day, when you shall find
yourself with Mr Sse, if you ask him about it, you
will be convinced that that there is no want of
truth in what I have said."
" Young Sse is like a felled tree, or a portion of
light foam on the surface of the water. After the
inquiries that have been made, it appears that he
no longer thinks of me: and you only speak to me
thus, sister, because you know that I shall have no
opportunity to see him."
What is that you say?" resumed Miss Lo. It
is in the hope of being married to you that young
Mr Sse is now running about from east to west,
destitute of every thing that makes life agreeable.
How can you speak so lightly of him ? This is
making a bad return for the extreme fidelity of this
young man. Last autumn he was promoted at the
examination of the north. Why then compare him
to a felled tree, or a portion of foam floating on the
surface of the water ?"
Miss Pe felt a little surprised at hearing this.
" It was then he who obtained the second place at
the examination. Why did he set himself down as
a candidate from Honan?" asked she.
"I have learned," replied Miss Lo, " that his
150
JUKIAO-LI
paternal uncle, the provincial judge Sse, was a na-
tive of Honan. He has now adopted him for his
son, and it is for that reason that Mr Sse stated
himself to be a candidate from Honan."
" Since he had obtained the degree he sought,
he should have come and demanded the fulfilment
of the engagement we had entered into," said Miss
Pe. " How comes it that we have never heard
from him since ?"
"The cause is, I suppose," replied Miss Lo,
" that he does not wish to return till he has ob-
tained the degree of doctor. You must, sister, have
a little patience, and wait for him. I am confident,
that sooner or later he will be here."
" I see, dear sister, that you speak very confi-
dently, and it appears to me that you must have
some reason for doing so. And yet, how could a
young girl like you, who never quitted the women's
apartments, have met Mr Sse? But still, if it was
any one else whom you had questioned, you could
not have obtained such precise information. If
you love me, sister, why do you not tell me all the
details, and relieve my mind from the doubts that
besiege
" At the point where we now are," replied Miss
Lo, " the best thing that I can do, is to tell you
the whole of the circumstances. But do not, sister,
make me the subject of your raillery afterwards."
" A secret commerce carried on in the inner
apartment of the women, is a much more serious
matter than this," replied Miss Pe; "and since
you have not blamed my imprudence, why should
I indulge myself in any raillery against you?"
" Well, since you have promised not to laugh at
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
151
my expense, I shall tell you what has taken place.
Last year young Mr Sse set out for the court, in
order to ask Dr Gou to interest himself with regard
to his marriage with you. On reaching the pro-
vince of Chantoung, he was suddenly attacked on
the high road, and plundered of all his baggage.
Finding himself in the greatest embarrassment, and
not knowing what to do, good luck willed it so,
that he become acquainted with a certain counsellor
Li, who lives in the house next door to ours, and
to whom he related what had befallen him. The
latter, seeing in young Sise a bachelor full of acquire-
ments, requested him to compose four pieces of
poetry for a silk skreen that was destined for the
judge of the province, promising him, in return,
the funds necessary to continue his journey. He
invited him to his house, and put him in an apart-
ment at the bottom of the garden. The pavilion in
which I resided was contiguous to that part of the
garden, and I had an opportunity of observing,
without being seen myself, young Sse. His superior
air, and the readiness with which he wrote the
verses, convinced me that he was a poet of the
greatest merit. Reflecting on my own situation, I
saw myself deprived of my father, my mother a
friendless widow, and my brother still a child.
Who then was there to busy themselves about my
marriage? If I persisted in observing the usual
rules, 1 should in the end find myself the dupe.
In this extremity, I thought myself justified in ac-
commodating myself to circumstances. I put on
the dress of a man, and had an interview behind
the garden-gate with Mr Sse."
Miss Pe remained for some time silent, after
152
JU-KIAO-LI:
hearing this account, which gave her no less satis-
faction than surprise. " Sister," she at length
said, " so young as you are, I should never have
supposed that you could have acted with so much
wit and resolution. It may be said that you are a
hero amongst the fair sex."
"There was in this no proof of extraordinary
intellect," replied Miss Lo. " What you say is
suggested by the extreme desire you have to see
me changed into a young man."
" Let us talk no more of that," said Miss Pe.
" But, sister, in the interview of a moment, how did
you come to speak of our adventures? This young
student must be a great babbler !"
" He is not a babbler," replied Miss Lo; "but
as I had made him a proposal of marriage, from
accepting which he repeatedly excused himself, I
pressed him to let me know the cause and he, not
knowing otherwise what to do, was obliged to
avow his previous engagement. He was certain
that I could never know anything more of a trans-
action that took place more than a thousand miles
off; and he had no kind of suspicion that he was
speaking to me of my uncle and my sister. I be-
lieve that it was the will of heaven that I should
thus have learned all these circumstances."
"
And, my dear sister, upon what did you agree
afterwards?" asked Miss Pe.
" When 1 saw that there was a secret engage-
ment, through which he would not break either in
life or death that he was not a giddy-headed per-
son ; and that since he was incapable of being
unfaithful for a moment to you, I ran no risk of his
becoming so to me afterwards-I renewed my pro-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
153
posals more eagerly than ever, and at length ob-
tained his consent to a double marriage. It was
then that, under pretext of flying from persecution,
I engaged my mother to come here. With this
secret thought I set out, proposing to myself to
arrange the affair with you, my sister. I did not
then foresee that you would be so willing to join
with me in accomplishing a union sweet as the
concert of teals, and intricate as the intertwinings
of the ivy; and I was ignorant that you would put
your interests in common with mine, and, without
requiring any formal arrangement, consent to all
that accorded with the wishes of young Sse. Heaven,
it may be said, has well seconded the wishes of
man, and no obstacle has started up to impede the
project I had formed."
" You are really full of understanding, dear
sister," resumed Miss Pe. "Young Sse's entire
conduct appeared to me as obscure as if it had
been enveloped in fog and smoke; and were it not
for the explanations that you have given me, he
would be still like the stag lost amongst the bushes.
If you are, besides, capable of plucking the flower
and fixing it to the tree, if you know how to sacri-
fice yourself for another, the heroines of former
days cannot be said to have surpassed you. But
after young Sse went away, how did you learn that
he had set himself down as a. candidate from
Honan?"
" Our neighbour, counsellor Li," replied Miss
Lo, " is a man entirely devoted to persons in place
and favour. We saw him, some time ago, preparing
some fine presents to be sent to the newly-adopted
154
JU-KIAO-LI:
son of the judge of the province: he said that this
SOR was the very young man who had composed the
verses for him, and as he had upon that occasion
given him but a poor reception, he now wished to
make up for it by an extraordinary degree of polite-
ness. Who could this young man be, if he were
not Mr Sse? And as the lord judge is from Honan,
I knew from that circumstance that young Sse had
entered himself amongst the candidates of that
province. Afterwards, when the lists of the exami-
nation were published, counsellor Li again sent to
compliment him and this was what made me ac-
quainted with his success."
" After what you now mention, there can be no
doubt of its being young Sae," replied Miss Pe;
" and since he has not forgotten me, our former
engagement subsists. Now that you are come to
aid me, dear sister, no sorrow shall enter into my
peaceful retreat."
"And to conclude," resumed Miss Lo; " as, ou
coming here, I dreaded that, if young Sse should
not find me on his return, he would wander about
in search of me, I sent a servant to the capital to
deliver him a letter. I have not yet received an
answer. The period of the examination is already
past, but I know not whether young See has been
again successful. Sister, why do you not send
some one to ascertain this ?"
"I had forgotten it," said Miss Pe. " The lists
of the general examination were brought to my
father some days ago but as I took no interest in
them, I did not read them ; and I do not know
where they have been deposited."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
155
Yansou, who was near her, said, " I believe they
were left in the pavilion of rural dreams; I shall
go and look for them."
An instant after, she returned with the lists which
she had found. The two cousins unfolded them,
and, on looking over them, saw that the thirteenth
name was that of Sse Yeoupe. This circumstance
filled them with joy. "It may be said," cried they,
" that heaven favours the desires of mortals."
From that moment the two cousins felt their
mutual esteem and affection redoubled. They
were never out of each other's sight for a quarter of
an hour.
Grief has but a period, and the bee produces honey.
Sentiment assumes a hundred different forms, and the
worm spins silk.
If the fair one had not with her own lips explained the
mystery,
Who could have unravelled so many contradictory
rumours ?
Let us leave the two cousins full of joy in the
privacy of their apartment, and speak of Sse Yeoupe,
who from Chantoung had gone into the province
of Honan. He there performed a sacrifice to his
ancestors, and immediately took the road to Kinling.
He soon arrived there, and wished to go without
delay to the village of Kinchi, to visit Pe. Whilst
he was getting ready the usual presents, he sent a
servant before him with the two letters from Dr
Gou and the inspector general Sse. He hoped to
receive some good news after these letters should
have been delivered. But the following day the
messenger came back, and told him that, on going
to the house he was informed that the lord Pe was
156
JU-KIAO-LI:
not there, but had gone on a little journey of plea-
sure to Hangtcheou. I gave the two letters to the
porter," continued he; and he told me that his
master would answer them as soon as he returned.
1 informed him that your lordship wished to pay a
visit to his master. He replied, that his master
not being at home, there was nobody to receive
you, and that your lordship should not take the
trouble of coming; but that if you insisted upon
paying the visit, all that was necessary was to leave
a card, which he would put into the registry kept
at the gate."
Sse Yeoupe felt extremely disappointed at this
account, and remained some time without speaking.
Poor Sse Yeoupe!" said he to himself, " you are
not favoured by fate. You go into Chantoung to
meet Lo Mengli, and cannot see her you come
here to visit the lord Pe, he is from home. What
is now to be done?"
" The lord Pe," he then continued to himself,
" will no doubt soon return. I had therefore better
remain some days here, and wait for him. You
should," said he, addressing the messenger, "have
inquired when the lord Pe would return."
"I did inquire," replied the messenger, " and
was told lord Pe had not long been gone; that his
intention being to make an excursion of pleasure,
he would be absent probably a month, probably
two or three; and that it was impossible to fix
precisely the period of his return."
Sse Yeoupe, reflecting upon this statement, said
to himself, Although the lord Pe be not at home,
I have a great desire to go to-morrow, and pay my
first visit. Probably I shall find some favourable
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
157
opportunity to see Yansou, and learn some news
of her young mistress since our departure."
Then, pursuing his reflections, he said to himself,
Should I go, my retinue, my servants, the people
who follow and accompany me, all this would
prevent me from getting any private information.
And even should I be led into the saloon, Yansou
will not be able to come to me. It would serve no
purpose to go there. Should I remain here, the
time for entering on my functions would soon over-
take me. Since it is upon a journey of pleasure
that the lord Pe is gone to the western lake *, I
had better go after him thither.
When he had determined upon this plan, he saw
the officers of his tribunal coming to meet him.
Sse Yeoupe, after making his official proclamation,
set out; and as he had not caused his approach to
be announced on the road, he arrived in seven or
eight days at Hangtcheou. He was very much
occupied, at first, in visiting the authorities, and
taking possession of his office; but after some
days, finding himself at leisure, he sent a person
to the western lake, to inquire where his lordship,
the counsellor of state, Pe of Kinling, was lodged.
The person whom he had charged with this com-
mission, took a whole day to execute it and on his
return, he told his master, that after having been
to all the convents of the western lake, to all the
158
JU-KIAO-LI
inns and farm-houses, and after having made in-
quiries in every direction, he could not learn that
any counsellor of state, named Pe, had arrived
there.
" This is very extraordinary," exclaimed Sse
Yeoupe " nevertheless, his servants very distinctly
said that he had gone thither how happens it that
he is not there ?" And he sent his servants to make
inquiries in all parts of the city.
Now Pe, as he was proceeding on his journey to
the borders of the western lake, recollected that
the inspector=general Yang was governor of the
province ; and fearing that, if he should hear of his
arrival, he might wish to make a return for the at-
tention paid him in Pe's house, and detain him on
his way back, he therefore thought proper to change
his name and, adding something to the orthography
of the word Pe, he called himself Hoangfou*, a
private citizen, so that no person could tell where
he lived. He then hired, for his residence, a small
grotto close to the bridge of Sinling; and every
day, being dressed like a private individual, in a
linen garment and rush shoes, and followed by a ser-
vant carrying the four precious articles belonging to
the closet of a man of letters, he went, either in a
little bark or on foot, to enjoy the view of the double
peak and the six bridges. Whenever he met any
young men of family, he made the most minute in-
quiries about everything concerning them:
He was one day seated in the gallery of the cold-
spring, occupied in admiring the limpid water that
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
159
flowed over the rocks of dazzling whiteness, when
he saw approaching six or seven young men with
large caps on their heads, clothed in garments
of various colours, and followed by great numbers
of servants, carrying carpets of felt, and several
flasks of wine. They all entered the gallery to
partake of a collation ; and perceiving Pe, who was
seated there before them, and whose noble air, in
despite of the plainness of his dress and the two
servants who attended him, shewed that he was not
a man of common rank, they all made him an obei-
sance, and then sat down. A short time afterwards
the servant served up the collation, to which the
young men invited Pe. "My lord," said they, if
you have no objection, will you do us the favour to
join us ?"
On seeing six or seven young men, all in the
flower of their age, Pe thought that he might pro-
bably find a man of merit amongst them. He there-
fore did not wait to be pressed much, but con-
tented himself with saying-" Gentlemen, without
knowing you, how can I think of becoming trouble-
some to you?
" Not at all," replied the young men. " In the
midst of the lakes and the mountains, all those
who live between the four seas are brothers."
"Well, gentlemen," said Pe, "I am very much
obliged to you;" and he went and sat down with
them.
They had not drunk more than a few cups,
when one of the young men of the company, ad-
dressing Pe, said-" From your language, my
lord, perceive that you cannot be from our city of
Hangtcheou. Tell us, I beg of you, the name of
160
JU-KIAO-L1:
your country, your own name, and what brings you
here?"
"I am from Kinling," replied Pe : " my family
name is Hoangfou. The beauty of your country,
of your lakes and mountains has induced me to
make an excursion here."
" Are you in the schools, or in an official situa-
tion?" asked the young men.
I am neither in the schools, nor in an official
situation," replied Pe ; " I have in my own village
a couple of acres of ground, and I occupy myself
in rendering them productive."
" For a village farmer," said one of the young
men, "you are somewhat of a friend to dissipation,
my old comrade since you come for the mere plea-
sure of the walk to these lakes and mountains."
" Permit me to ask you, gentlemen," said Pe,
"if you are in the schools, or in official situa-
tions ?"
"We are here seven," replied one of the com-
pany, "who honour the same tutelary deity."
Then, pointing with his finger to his companions,
"these three gentlemen," said he, " are students of
the college of Jinho; these two here belong to the
college of Tsiantang; and I myself am in the col-
lege of the department, and obtained recently a
degree at Nanyoung." Then, pointing out the young
man who had asked the first questions, "for this
gentleman," continued he, "he is like you, my old
friend, neither in the schools nor in any official
situation."
"The gentleman has then obtained some very
high degree?" asked Pe.
The young man began to laugh. "You guess
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
161
well, my old friend," he cried; " you have found it
out at the first offer: the family name of this gen-
tleman is Wang; he was promoted at the last au-
tumn examination. He is, you see, the germ of a
great personage."
" Ah, gentlemen," resumed Pe, "since such is
the case, you are so many branches of the river of
literature. I have been wanting in the respect due
to you."
The licentiate Wang then took a part in the con-
versation. " What do you say of literature?"
said he. " It is a profession that breaks the head
and the bones. You would easily succeed in it.
This degree of licentiate is obtained by bolstering
up your studies with a little boasting and babbling;
but the fact is, my old brother, that you find it more
agreeable not to study, but to purchase some good
acres of ground, to amass money, and to make
yourself merry with flesh and with fish !"
Another of the party then said, "My lord Wang,
behold you are now, after your success, like a
god upon earth; do not therefore use the language
of a man of pleasure. It appears to me, that it
is bachelors who are subjected to suffering. When
the principal comes, we must undergo the yearly
examination. In college we must appear at the
monthly examination. As friends, however, we
cannot refrain from seeing and enjoying eachother's
society. There are disadvantages in not studying,
and also disadvantages in being devoted to study."
"My dear friend," said a third, "you speak
only of disadvantages, and you say nothing of the
pleasure there is in walking about the city, speak-
162
JU-KIAO-LI:
ing of other people's affairs, and partaking of good
cheer."
At these last words all the company laughed ;
and after they had remained some time longer at
table, one of the young men said, " We are drink-
ing too much; I shall take no more. How comes it,
that, being all assembled here, we have not as yet
written any verses? Somebody must propose a
subject; let every one write something on it; and
that will conclude our meeting for this morning."
" Who can think of writing verses after a colla-
tion ?" cried one of the young men.
"Even should we not finish them, let us at least
choose a subject," said another; " and to-morrow
we can give them the last polish, with the assist-
ance of our comrades."
"Speak not thus like men of contracted views,"
said the licentiate Wang. "Since it is necessary
to write, let us write; and let those who shall
not finish their poems be condemned to drink
three cups."
"This is sufficient to give us inspiration," ex-
claimed the young men; " but our old brother
Hoangfou here,-what is he to do?"
" How can you make him compose verses, since
he has never studied?" asked the licentiate
Wang. Let him drink, that will be sufficient
for him."
"Right ! right !" cried the young men. " Give
us the subject, if you please."
" Let it be the Excursion of the Western Lake :
what necessity is there to seek another ?" replied
the licentiate Wang.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
163
"The subject is a good one, but a little difficult,"
observed the young men : " however, let us say no
more about it."
The servants were then ordered to bring the pa-
per, ink, pens, and ink-stands, which had been
brought from town, and to place them before the
company. All then set about composing some
remained silent, seeking for ideas; others drunk
some cups, to enable them to go in quest of their
expressions; while some others, holding their pens
raised, and shaking their heads, muttered with
difficulty some syllables. They had been a long
time occupied in this manner, without any one of
them having finished his task. Pe, who was ob-
serving them, burst into an involuntary fit of laugh-
ter. "Do not laugh, old brother," said the licen-
tiate Wang. "You who have never studied, can-
not conceive the trouble there is in composing
verses there is an old proverb, which says-' to
make a verse of five syllables, you must pluck out
more than one bristle of your beard.' "
"Though I have not studied," replied Pe, "I
could contrive to write a couple of verses."
" If you are able," said the young men, "why
do you not set about writing a piece of poetry ?"
If I must compose one," replied Pe, "give
me the rhyme otherwise, there are so many persons
who have written upon the subject of an excursion
to the western lake, that you might say, I pilfered
from some ancient poem."
On hearing him speak with so much assurance,
the licentiate Wang said to himself, " Since he
wishes to have the rhyme given him, I shall choose
164
JU-KIAO-LI:
him a very difficult one." Then, raising his head, he
perceived at one side of the gallery a Japanese
pear-tree in full blossom, and pointing it out with
his finger to Pe, he said, " Well, the rhyme shall be
the name of that pear-tree."
" Be it so," replied Pe, and immediately he or-
dered the servants who attended him, to take out of
his chest of ceremonies an antique inkstand of Tou-
anhi, a pen with a handle of striped bamboo, a
stick of excellent old ink, and a sheet of paper
ruled with black lines ; and to place them upon the
mat.
When they saw these pens, and this ink of
the first quality, the young men began to be a little
disconcerted, and whispered to each other, " Who
could have imagined that this old simpleton was
possessed of such choice things ? He must be some
rich old fellow !"
" If he be a rich old fellow," added another,
" he will certainly not be able to compose any-
thing."
In the midst of these doubts and conjectures,
they saw Pe seize the pen; and it was soon like
a cloud which lets fall torrents of rain. In less
than a quarter of an hour the four distichs were
written. As soon as Pe had finished them, the
young men hastened to take and read them;
when they found what follows:-
At the voice of the hawk the swallow flies away, like
to a tissue of silk;
The lake spreads, to the distance of ten miles, its shores
which resemble perfumed carpets.
The sun sheds an odour like flowers and even the dust
under the horse's feet is balmy.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
165
It is a tennis court in which the spring detains us with
his soft smiles.
The mountains pierce the walls .of the city, and the
bridges traverse the monasteries;
The houses are enveloped in flowers, and the cottages
covered with willows.
If it be asked where the breeze got his enchanting
breath,
It is from the flute of jasper and golden oboe which
adorn the pear-tree.
By old Hoangfou of Kinling.
As soon as they had finished reading, the young
men, struck with astonishment, exclaimed What
beautiful verses what noble expressions From
your extraordinary skill, it is impossible to suppose
that you have never studied. Has not your lord-
ship been pleased to divert yourself at our ex-
pense?"
"How could you suppose any such thing?" said
Pe, laughing. " Although capable of writing
some verses, I have really not pursued any regular
studies. The ancients were accustomed to say,
that poetry required a particular kind of talent,
which had nothing in common with classical
studies."
As the sun now began to decline towards the
west, Pe's servants came up to him, carrying a
sedan chair, similar to those made use of for tra-
velling in the mountains.
Pe immediately rose up, and, approaching the
young men to take leave of them, said, "I ought
not so soon to quit your company; but the day
declines; I am old ; and I dare not remain any
longer."
On seeing this splendid equipage, the young
166
JU-KIAO-LI:
men instantly rose up, and wished to accom-
pany him a part of the way. Pe returned them
his thanks, ascended his sedan chair, and set off,
escorted by his bearers and footmen, leaving
the young men to their doubts and conjectures,
though they felt convinced that he was no ordi-
nary man. How much did they regret the indis-
creet expressions that had escaped them, and the
too great familiarity with which they had treated
him !
How discover that that lake is nothing less than the
ocean itself?
Mushrooms of a morning reckon not upon a long ex-
istence.
What has inspired these scholars with so much pre-
sumption and impoliteness
The cause is, they have seen the heavens for a moment
through a tube.
One day it happened that a member of the
monastery of Tchaohing, named Hianyun, brought
Pe some fresh tea. Pe kept him to take a collation,
which was got ready at the moment without any
ceremony, and continuing the conversation, said,
The western lake is the most celebrated in the
south-eastern provinces of the empire: it is the
rendezvous of men of letters. Who amongst the
young distinguished scholars of our time are there
at present?"
" Many men of reputation frequent the borders
of the western lake," replied Hianyun ; "but there
are reputations that are solid, and others that have
no foundation. Within these last few days there
came, however, from Soungkiang, two young men,
one named Tchao and surnamed Tsianli, and the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
167
other whose name is Tcheou, and surname Ching-
wang. These two are amongst the number of those
scholars whose reputation is well founded."
" How have you been able to know that ?" asked
Pe.
" They are young, and of the most prepossessing
appearance," replied Hianyun; "their composi-
tions also are received with universal praise. The
friends they have amongst the most distinguished
inhabitants of the country, come every day to visit
them. The throng never diminishes. Men of high
rank, and the first magistrates of the empire, are
amongst their acquaintances. Some ask them to
compose literary works for them; others invite them
to their houses. They are every day upon the
water in boats, partaking of collations and sharing
in all manner of amusements. They went a few
days ago to visit bis highness the governor Yang.
His lordship received them himself, and gave them
the most honourable welcome. He kept them two
days, and wished them to stay longer. Yesterday
they were requested to choose the pieces for the
examination of the city. If they were not men of
real and eminent talent, could they have made such
an impression upon all those who see them? ?"
" Where do these gentlemen lodge ?" asked Pe.
In the left wing of our monastery," replied
Hianyun.
'In which building?" again asked Pe.
" There is no necessity to inquire," said Hianyun.
Once at the monastery, you have only to name Tchao
Tsianli, and Tcheou Chingwang. Who is he that
does not know them ?"
" After all that you tell me," said Pe, " they
168
JU-KIAO-LI:
must certainly be two celebrated men." He con-
tinued some time longer the conversation; after
which Hianyun took leave of him, and went away.
Pe felt great internal satisfaction. "I knew well,"
said he to himself; that I should discover some
one upon the borders of the western lake. This
does not surpass my expectations. I shall go to-
morrow to see them ; and if they be possessed of
real talent, the marriage of Houngiu and Mengli
shall be soon concluded."
The next morning, having provided himself with
a straw hat and a country dress, which gave him
the appearance of an inhabitant of the mountains,
and having taken two visiting cards, upon which he
wrote only the name of Hoangfou of Kinling, he
went, followed only by a little servant boy, to visit
the two young men. He was about asking for
them at the gate of the monastery, when some one
said to him-" You are come no doubt to see
Messieurs Tchao and Tcheou : go to the eastern
wing."
Pe entered the convent, and went towards the
place which had been mentioned to him. He soon
perceived, at the entrance of a cell, a great number
of servants and persons in blue clothes, some of
whom held visiting cards, and others bore presents:
some were entering, others coming out. There was
a great bustle and hurrying backwards and forwards.
Pe approached the door, and told his valet, as he
passed, to present the visiting cards. The porter
received them, and said, " My masters will not have
the pleasure to receive them ; they are gone out.
Have the goodness to leave me your cards."
" Where are your masters gone ?" asked Pe.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
169
"To town, sir, to the house of Wangtchunyouan,"
replied the porter ; "they were invited to be present
at a discussion relative to an inscription that is about
to be begun. They have some visits to pay on
the road, and I fear that they will not return before
noon. They are invited to-day by the lord Tchang
of Tsiantang and as soon as they return, it will be
time for them to go to dinner."
" Such being the case," replied Pe, " take the
trouble of keeping my card. I shall return to see
them." The porter made a sign that he would
acquit himself of the commission and addressing
himself to the little servant boy, he said-" Where
does your master live ? These gentlemen will wish
to return his visit to-morrow."
" He lodges at the farm of Tsaiya, near the bridge
of Siling," replied the little servant.
Pe then quitted the convent. He still saw a
great number of persons going in to visit Messieurs
Tchao and Tcheou, and he could not help laughing
in his mind. 'Who can these young men be, who
are thus thought so highly of?"
He returned to his lodgings to repose himself.
In the evening, towards the decline of day, he went
on foot to the bridge, to enjoy the view of the lake.
From thence he perceived a large pleasure-boat,
from which were heard the sound of flutes and the
voices of singers, and which was moving in the di-
rection of the bridge. Some one who was near him
said, " It is the lord sub-prefect Tsiantang, and
his company."
In a moment the boat was under the bridge;
Pe looked with more attention, and saw the sub-
prefect at the lower end; and in the most honourable
170
JU-KIAO-LI :
place were two tables, at which were seated two
young men, who were speaking in a loud and con-
fident tone of voice. He followed them with his
eyes as they moved away; and they appeared to
him well-looking 'men, and formed to enjoy life.
He could not observe them long or closely, as the
boat passed rapidly by. The view he had, however,
prepossessed him in their favour.
The next morning he went again to see them,
but they were not at home. After the lapse of four
or five days, he saw a servant, having two visiting
cards in his hand, running in the most hurried man-
ner towards his residence, and demanding if it was
not there that Mr Hoangfou lived ? The people of
the house answered in the affirmative, when the
servant said, "Take quickly these cards: Messieurs
Tchao and Tcheou are coming to pay him a visit:
their bark will be here in a moment."
On hearing this, Pe went out in great haste to
receive them, and saw two young men who had
already entered the gate. He invited them into the
house with great ceremony and the compliments
being terminated, they took the places consecrated
by usage. Tchao Tsianli was the first to speak.
Your lordship deigned some days ago," said he,
"to cast a look upon us; we were very anxious to
run hither to ask permission to see you. But what
was to be done ? For the two whole days we were
taken up with his highness the governor. Yesterday
we were obliged to partake of a collation at the
sub-prefect's. Our days fly by in the midst of
chariots and horses. Such have been the causes
of the delay. We humbly hope that you will not
impute it to us as a crime."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
171
" Gentlemen," replied Pe, you are both in the
flower of your age, and gifted with remarkable
talents. You must sacrifice. some interests to the
joy and gratification of the rest of the world."
" We are," replied Tcheou Chingwang, nothing
more than poor scholars without merit, on whom
chance has conferred a vain reputation ; this is for
us a subject of the most unutterable confusion.
From what country," he added, " does your lord-
ship come ?"
Kinling," replied Pe.
"
Kinling is a noble country, and your excellency
represents it worthily," resumed Tchao Tsianli.
Dr Gou Touian," he continued," and Pe Thaîhiouan,
belonging to the department of the public works,
who are of your city, are, no doubt, known to your
lordship?"
"I have heard speak of them," replied Pe, a little
surprised " but I have never been in their com-
pany. Permit me, sir, to ask you the motive of
that question ?"
"These two lords are the ornament of Kinling,"
replied Tchao Tsianli, and we are on very good
terms with them: this was my reason for inquiring
about them."
" You have already met them ?" asked Pe.
" We are continually passing from one place to
another it would have been difficult for us not to
have met them," said Tchao Tsianli. " Last autumn
the lord Gou presided at the examinations of the
kingdom of Tsou, and he was anxious that we should
have come there to compose his programme, and the
introduction to the lists of the examination; but we
had with us at home too many friends, who would
172
JU-KIAO-LI:
not consent to our leaving them : so that it was
impossible for us to comply with his desires."
"Ah, gentlemen, in what high estimation Gou
Touian must hold you!" exclaimed Pe. " But I
have heard that Pe Thaihiouan was an old man
who saw very little company. How did you contrive
to be on such good terms with him ?"
"True enough, the lord Pe sees but little com-
pany," said Tcheou Chingwang; " but he loves
wine and poetry, and we have many a time drunk
and composed with him. This was the origin of
our intimacy."
" From what I see," said Pe laughing, " there
is no one under heaven, who has not his weak side."
The two young men conversed a little more ;
then, having taken tea, they hastily rose up. Pe
made no effort to detain them; but he reconducted
them to the door, where they quitted him.
What you hear attracts you,
What strikes your eyes deters you
There is a great difference between what has been told
you and what you see ;
A hollow noise will not give rise to esteem.
After the departure of these two young men, Pe
could not repress a sigh : " Such scholars," said
he, " with all their celebrity, are persons who
ought to die of shame!"
In the next chapter will be seen what took place
after this event.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
173
CHAPTER XVII.
THE PERSECUTIONS OF A MAN IN POWER OBLIGE
A MAGISTRATE TO RESIGN HIS OFFICE.
" How detestable the passions of the wicked render them! Even
their offers of service are pernicious and fatal. He who receives com-
pany, confides to a dog the care of his gate ; and the knave takes care
not to drive away the insects that hum around him. The forehead even
of the statue of the most powerful of the gods is not sheltered from
pollution, and the ice is formed between his august eye-brows. Knaves
will emulate each other in multiplying odious persecutions; but perhaps
in the end they will cease to act in concert."
PE thus passed his time upon the borders of the
western lake, always occupied in looking for a son-
in-law, and taking much pains to no purpose.
Those whom he had at first supposed to be not
devoid of talent and accomplishments, were boasting
school-boys, and liars : not one of them appeared
worthy to fix his attention. After more than a
month's stay, becoming excessively wearied with
his fruitless search, he crossed the river at Tsian-
tang, and went to Chanyin *, to visit the grotto of
the celebrated emperor Ju.
In the mean time, Sse Yeoupe, though he had
commenced his functions, sent every day to make
inquiries after Pe, without being able to discover
any traces of him. He gave himself up in conse-
quence to the most excessive melancholy and
174
JU-KIAO-LI:
inquietude. One day some business of importance
obliged him to pay a visit to his highness the
governor Yang. After having signed the papers
that he had brought him, the governor shut his
gate and kept him to take tea. " You are very
young, sage magistrate!" said he to him.
" Pardon me*," replied Sse Yeoupe ; "I am,
this year, twenty-one years old."
" When I was at court," resumed the governor,
" I used to be, morning and evening, with the lord
your father, who is one of my most intimate friends :
and yet I never had the advantage of meeting you."
"My father and I," replied Sse Yeoupe, "are,
by relationship, only uncle and nephew : it was only
last year that he adopted me for his son. This was
the reason why I had not the honour of seeing your
excellency when you were at court."
" Ah, I understand," said the governor; " I now
in fact recollect that he had no son. But by your
accent you do not appear to be from Honan: in
what province did you first enter college ?"
" I am from Kinling," replied Sse Yeoupe.
" Since you have entered into the magistracy, I
see," said the governor, "that you have not as yet
formed an establishment. What is the reason of
that?"
"Chance and some peculiar circumstances have
made me wander about from place to place. Such
has been the cause of the delay."
"But now you can no longer defer it. I learned
yesterday," continued Yang, " that the lord Tchang
had been named governor of the hereditary prince.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
175
I should wish to address him some complimentary
verses on the occasion. You have a great deal of
talent, and you must come to-morrow, and lend me
your assistance."
"I have but a very moderate share of talent,"
replied Sse Yeoupe ; " but I must make an effort
to obey your orders."
After having drunk two cups of tea, Sse Yeoupe
took leave and went away.
Now the governor Yang, as it may be recollected,
was no other than Yang Thingtchao. He had a
daughter who was just at the age when young
girls begin to enclose their hair with a clasp*
Seeing Sse Yeoupe to be a man in the flower of his
age, with a handsome face and an agreeable figure,
and already possessing the degree of doctor, he
resolved to keep him to take tea, and have a mo-
ment's conversation with him. He was extremely
delighted to learn that this young man was not yet
married.
The next morning, the prefect of the department,
having come to pay him a visit, he had this magis-
trate shewn into an inner saloon, and there he made
known to him the resolution he had taken to make
Sse Yeoupe his son-in-law. He then entreated
the prefect to act the part of go-between on the
occasion. The latter dared not refuse such a
commission; and, on returning to his own house, he
immediately sent an invitation to: Sse Yeoupe, to
come and see him. When Sse Yeoupe presented
himself, he said to him, "I have to congratulate
you, my virtueus friend.'.
176
JU*KIAO-LI:
" On what account?" asked Sse Yeoupe.
" I have been this morning to visit the governor.
His highness kept me to take tea: he told me that
he had a daughter equally virtuous as beautiful; and,
having been struck by the success which you have
obtained at so early an age, and understanding that
you are unmarried, he intrusted me with the care of
bringing about an alliance between you and himself.
He wishes that an indissoluble and happy tie may
bind you to him. This is undoubtedly an extremely
fortunate event: for what could one rejoice, if not
for a piece of good fortune like this ? This was the
subject upon which I congratulated you."
"I am infinitely sensible of the kind intentions of
his highness, as also of your kindness, Mr Prefect."
replied Sse Yeoupe. "I certainly ought not to
refuse such an offer but my father has already
written to our countryman Pe, who is in the depart-
ment of the public works, to ask the hand of his
daughter for me."
Is the proposal your father has made for you,
already accepted?" asked the prefect. " If it be
not definitively concluded on, the manner in which
his highness insists upon conferring on you this
mark of his goodness, and the offers made you, will
scarcely admit of refusal."
" It is a long time ago," replied Sse Yeoupe,
" since I entered into an engagement with the lord
Pe relative to that marriage. Besides, my father's
letter has been already sent, and moreover the
historiographer Gou Touian has undertaken the
office of go-between. There is consequently no
means of being off from this marriage, or of entering
on another. I hope, Mr Prefect, that you will be
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
177
good enough to make my excuses to the governor,
as I am obliged to refuse this mark of his kindness."
"That will not be difficult," replied the prefect.
" There is, however, one thing to be observed :
the governor is a man with whom it is as well not
to have any cause of dissatisfaction; the more
particularly as you and I are under his jurisdiction.
Such an answer to the proposal of a marriage with
his daughter, may lead to unpleasant results."
"People in office have always some discussions
of this kind to carry on," replied Sse Yeoupe ; "but
with regard to this proposed marriage, it is im-
possible for me to execute your orders."
However that may be," said the prefect, " you
should 'give it more consideration, and not sin
through too much wilfulness."
" The nature of this affair is very plain," replied
Sse Yeoupe. Marriage is an act regulated by
certain conditions, established by the rites relative
to social relations. Since I have already made one
proposal, how can I now think of making another ?
I have therefore, only to pray you, Mr Prefect, to
employ all the precautions necessary in giving him
my answer."
The prefect, seeing that Sse Yeoupe resisted all
his entreaties, and that there was nothing to be
hoped for, resolved to repeat to the governor, word
for word, all that Sse Yeoupe had said to him.
When the governor learned that the person sought
in marriage by Sse Yeoupe was the daughter of
Pe, the intelligence suggested to him various re-
flections. "The daughter of Pe Thaibiouan," said
he to himself, " has a great reputation for talent
and beauty: every one is in love with her. Besides,
178
JU-KIAO-LI
he has for a go-between Gou Touian, and his father
Sse Fanghoei is also on very good terms with the
family. There are nine reasons out of ten for
believing that the marriage will take place. It is
no wonder that he should not have come into my
views. I should think little of all this, if he shewed
himself favourable to my proposal; for though by
my place 1 am his superior, yet he is a young man
in the flower of his age, whose merit has been
already proved at the examination. But unless old
Pe should reject him, he will never think of ac-
cepting my offer. But, after all, who knows but Pe
may not be willing to listen to him at present?"
He pursued this train of thought without being
able to hit upon any expedient; when suddenly
an idea struck him. "Some time back, when old Pe
made me stay some days in his house, he had a
certain Tchangfanjou residing with him, who kept
me company during my sojourn there. Since my
departure I had lost sight of him. But some days
ago he sent me a card, requesting to be allowed to
see me. Imagining that he wanted to get something
from me, in consequence of his intimacy with old
Pe, and not having any wish to renew the acquain-
tance, I refused to receive him. But it will now
be useful to invite him to dinner. I shall begin by
settling the business that has brought him here,
and I can afterwards find out from him, what are
the present intentions of old Pe. If there be any
machine we can bring into play, I shall not yet
despair of our project."
Having resolved upon this plan, the governor
ordered one of his officers to write his name upon
a card, and send it to Mr Tchangfanjou of Tanyang,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
179
together with an invitation to dinner in the private
apartment. Conformably to this order, the officer
prepared the card, and sent his servant with it and
the invitation.
It may be recollected, that when Tchangfanjou
quitted Pe's house, where he had played SO ridicu-
lous a part, he pretended that it was the approaching
examination that obliged him to do so. He was
not a man to blush at his conduct; but recollecting
that he had made the acquaintance of governor
Yang, he came to seek a refuge at Hangtcheou.
There he had paid a great number of visits to the
governor; but seeing that his politeness met with
no return, he judged that the governor had no
wish to receive him, and he ceased his visits. The
arrival of a messenger with a visiting card and an
invitation, was therefore a most unexpected event
for him. Full of joy, he partly changed his clothes
and cap, and went to wait before the gate of the
palace. At noon the gates were thrown open, the
names of the personsinvited were called, and Tchang-
fanjou was admitted into the palace. After the
first compliments, the governor and his guest sat
down each in their place and the former, beginning
the conversation, said, "Since your first visit, I
have been wishing to ask you to dinner; do not be
offended, I beg of you, that the affairs of government
have prevented me from doing so till this mo-
ment."
"I had already received numberless favours from
you," replied Tchangfanjou; " and I considered
myself the happiest man in the world. You now
do me the signal honour of inviting me to dine with
you; what can I do to shew myself worthy of it :?"
180
JU-KIAO-LI:
Shortly after dinner was brought in, and when
the first cups had been emptied, the governor said,
" You have taken up your residence with Pe Thai-
hiouan : how have you found time to come here?'
"I took leave of my lord Pe at the approach of
the last autumn examination, where I was a candi-
date," replied Tchangfanjou. "This has enabled
me to come hither, and approach the fountain of
reason and virtue."
" Ah! you have quitted Pe Thaihiouan?" said
the governor. ' I know not if he has married his
daughter since: have you heard anything about it ?"
"To tell your highness the truth," said Tchang-
,fanjou, "though I was at first living with the lord
Pe upon the footing of an ordinary guest, he had
really given me hopes that he would accept me as
a son-in-law. I could never have imagined that
the lord Pe would afterwards have lent his ears to
the calumnies of some persons of no consideration,
which obliged me to take leave of him : however, I
have heard that his daughter is not yet married."
"Old Pe is an extremely wilful man, and full of
confidence in himself. Formerly, when I was at
court, I repeatedly proposed to him a marriage be-
tween his daughter and my son, but he would not
listen to it."
If it be thus he pretends to secure a son-in-law,
I fear that the marriage of his daughter will not
take place during her present state of existence ","
said Tchangfanjou.
"True, you are right," said the governor, bursting
into a loud laugh. "But I have lately been in-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
181
formed that the judge Sse had proposed for her,
through the medium of Gou Touian. You probably
know that?"
"I did not know it before. Permit me to ask you
who is this judge Sse?"
"He is one of the newly-promoted doctors, Sse
Yeoupe," replied the governor.
"This Sse Yeoupe is from the province of Ho-
nan," observed Tchangfanjou.
It is because his paternal uncle comes from
Honan," replied the governor, "that he has in-
scribed himself amongst the candidates of the pro-
vince; he is himself from Kinling."
In that case it is Mr Sse surnamed Liansian!"
exclaimed Tchangfanjou in great surprise. "Ithought
it was another person of the same name."
" Are you acquainted with him ?" asked the go-
vernor.
Mr Sse and I are intimate friends; he lived
upwards of a month in my garden," replied Tchang-
fanjou.
"I am delighted to hear it," said the governor,
for I have something to confide to you."
May I ask what it is?" said Tchangfanjou.
I have a daughter," said the governor, " and I
have cast my eyes upon him for a son-in-law; but
his views being directed towards the daughter of
the lord Pe, he persists in refusing my offers.
Since you are intimate with him, you must take the
trouble to speak to him on the subject. The lord
Pe is a fastidious and obstinate man. The mar-
riage he projects will be very difficult of accom-
plishment. It would be better for him to accede to
the proposal I make to him. Should the affair
182
JU-KIAO-LI:
succeed according to my wishes, I shall know how
to acknowledge your services."
Tchangfanjou made a low bow. "I receive your
orders," said he; and, after having drunk some
more cups, he rose up, took leave of the governor,
and went away.
When he returned home, Tchangfanjou made some
reflections upon what he had just heard. "What
torments have I not given myself," thought he;
"what a sum of money did I not spend in the be-
ginning, in order to secure an alliance with the
family of Pe! And yet I have lost my trouble and
my time. He has now made choice of one of the
newly-created doctors for a son-in-law. Is this not
enough to anger me? The best thing that I can do
is to overset the project. They are not yet be-
trothed; and if I can find out any means of sowing
division amongst them, I shall always be sure of the
protection of the governor in case of discovery. But
this little Sse is a very demon in love affairs. He
has now been a long time enamoured of Miss Pe;
he is like a man famished or devoured with thirst.
If I confine myself merely to exhorting him or reason-
ing him out of his purpose, he will pay no attention
to my words. I suppose he cannot be accurately in-
formed of what has recently taken place in Pe's
house; I must therefore tell him something of my
own invention; I shall tell him that Miss Pe is
dead. By that means I shall cut short his projects,
and governor Yang will not have to regret the failure
of the marriage he wishes to take place."
Tchangfanjou was satisfied with this stratagem,
and the next morning he got ready some presents,
wrote his name upon a visiting card, and went to
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
183
pay his devoirs and compliments to Sse Yeoupe.
The usher, after announcing him, shewed him in.
It was exactly at the time when Sse Yeoupe was
having inquiries made in all directions about Pe,
so that the sight of Tchangfanjou's card gave him
great pleasure. "This man," thought he, " will
certainly know something about the lord Pe."
He ran eagerly to the saloon to receive Tchang-
fanjou. They both accosted each other with a
smiling and satisfied air, and after the first compli-
ments, joyfully sat down. Then Tchangfanjou, com-
mencing the conversation, said-" You quitted us
very suddenly, my lord; but no day has passed since
without my thinking of you. Now that I have the
good fortune to meet you, I am not the less charmed
to see you, although the distance between us is as
great as that between the clouds and the slime of
the earth."
"I shall always recollect your obliging conduct
towards me," replied Sse Yeoupe. "Since fortune
more than my merit has favoured me, I am desirous
of letting you know something about me; but the
great distance did not permit it. When I passed
recently through Kinling, my leave of absence was
near expiring, so that I was not able to pay you a
visit. Hitherto I have not had a moment's leisure;
now that you have had the kindness to come to see
me, I feel very sensibly the favour. But permit me,
sir, to ask you a question. The lord Pe had made
arrangements for your residing with him ; you were
continually together morning and evening how
comes it that you have left his house ?"
"My first intention, as you well know," replied
Tchangfanjou, had been to marry his daughter;
184
JU-KIAO-LI:
but since she died, I saw no further use in remain-
ing in the house; so I took my leave and came
away."
These words threw Sse Yeoupe into the greatest
trouble : " Who died ?" he exclaimed.
" His daughter, Miss Pe, is dead," replied
Tchangfanjou. "Is it possible that you did not
know it?"
After a moment's stupor, during which he found
it impossible to speak, Sse Yeoupe exclaimed-
"How could I have known it When did she die,
and of what disease?"
" She died in the course of last winter," said
Tchangfanjou. "The great majority of girls of
great talent never come to good. Miss Pe had no
lack of confidence in her own talents; she passed
all her time in composing. Whenever she could
get a glimpse of the moon in autumn, or the flowers
in spring, she gave herself up to fatal emotions.
Added to this, she had an intractable and obstinate
father, always occupied in search of a son-in-law,
now on this side, then on that, without being able
to put an end to the wearisome celibacy of his
daughter. She at length fell sick, and her indis-
position degenerated into a languishing malady,
from which she never recovered. All the physi-
sicians said that it was a kind of consumption; but,
as far as I could judge, it was a moral malady that
killed her."
At this account, which bore such an appearance
of truth, and which inflicted so sudden and cruel a
blow, Sse Yeoupe could not restrain his tears. "I
have returned too late!" he gried. "I wished to
acquire reputation but it was for the purpose of
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
185
making me more worthy the happiness of marrying
that charming creature. My station in life is now
fixed; but she, for whom I desired it, has disappeared.
A vain dream of glory has led me astray; and I,
alas ! am the cause of her loss. One of the ancients
has said, I have not killed Pejin, but I am the
cause of his death. Blind that I was, to have failed
in my duty to so excellent a friend! Such is my
situation with regard to Miss Pe ! How can I avoid
feeling anguish in my heart?"
" Placed as you are in the first rank of public
officers," said Tchangfanjou, " the eyes of the
learned and the people are fixed upon you. You
ought, it appears to me, my lord, to moderate your
feelings conformably to the rites."
' An author of the time of the dynasty of Tsin
says, that the objects of our affections are identified
with ourselves," replied Sse Yeoupe. "You speak
to me of the rites; is it for us that they have been
instituted For whom do you take me, my dear
friend, that you form such an idea of me?"
" You are young, sir, and possessed of elevated
rank: would you accuse the whole world of not
being able to offer you a beautiful wife, and do you
wish to remain attached to her who is no more?"
"
She was the only one I ever loved in all my
life," exclaimed Sse Yeoupe. "Now that her lute
is broken, her image at least shall follow me into
solitude. What an infidelity would it not be, to go
and seek another fair one for a companion!"
"Bad news, when first heard, naturally produces
lively affiction," replied Tchangfanjou; "I am far,
my lord, from finding fault with yours. It would
be the language of a wretch to speak to you of the
186
JU-KIAO-LI:
water lentil and the alisma, at the very moment
when you are plunged in the grief of funereal
homage. You must, by little and little, accustom
yourself to think of them."
"You have an affection for me, my dear sir your
words have all the charm of friendship; but my
heart is not of rock, and I fear that it will never
recover itself."
" Your sensibility is excessive," said Tchang-
fanjou " but I have been too long fatiguing you
with my conversation. I shall now take leave of
you, and return another day to offer you my con-
solations."
" My heart is suffering cruelly," replied Sse
Yeoupe; " I dare not detain you any longer. I
shall see you another day, and receive your kind
instructions." As he said these last words, Sse
Yeoupe accompanied Tchangfanjou to the door,
where they separated. The next morning he went
to return him his visit; when Tchangfanjou renewed
his representations. "My lord," said he, " what-
ever idea you may have formed to yourself of the
talents of Miss Pe, you bad not entered into any
marriage contract with her. If her death prevented
you from marrying another, it would be making of
Miss Pe a second Soupou. I have lately heard
that the governor has a daughter equally remarkable
for merit and beauty; that he charged the prefect
to offer her to you in marriage, my lord; but that
you refused her in consequence of your previous
engagements with Miss Pe. But now that you
know that the latter is no more, you have no longer
any reason to persist in your refusal. His highness
knows that you honour me with your friendship,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
187.
and he has commissioned me to speak to you again
on the subject. You should not, my lord, keep to
your former resolution."
" An extreme languor, a complete stupidity, have
taken possession of my whole being," replied Sse
Yeoupe ; " and that to such a degree, that it is
impossible for me to listen to any further proposals
of marriage : a thousand obstacles prevent me from
complying with the orders of his highness. I hope,
my dear sir, that you will take the trouble of com-
municating to him my refusal."
Tchangfanjou essayed a hundred different ways
to bring him to compliance, and Sse Yeoupe shewed
equal obstinacy in refusing him. At length Tchang-
fanjou, having exhausted all his resources, saw him-
self obliged to carry his refusal to the governor, to
whom he repeated, word for word, the conversation
he had had with Sse Yeoupe. " It entirely depends
upon him," said Yang, laughing. "I invite you to
come to see me again: I shall myself think of some
other means."
The bee and the butterfly grieve because they cannot
gather the perfume of flowers;
The swallow and the loriot would fain, at any price,
arrest the flight of spring.
But to the king of the East it belongs to make the flowers
blow:
Neither the rain nor the wind can prevent them from
budding.
Sse Yeoupe's refusal to marry the daughter of the
governor, filled the heart of the latter with the keenest
resentment. He speedily occupied himself in col-
lecting difficult and confused causes, which he sent
to Sse Yeoupe to judge. The latter sent them back
188
JU-KIAO-LI
to him completely unravelled. This was not what
the governor hoped for. He annoyed him in every
possible way, forcing him to revise his judgments,
or reversing himself the decrees which he had given,
or reviving causes which had been already judged.
At other times he insisted upon Sse Yeoupe paying
him money which he had never received, or requiring
him to apprehend robbers of whom no traces could
be found. He thus fatigued Sse Yeoupe with daily
persecutions ; and when the business with which he
overwhelmed him was despatched, he still repri-
manded him, and never shewed him the least mark
of kindness.
" All this," said Sse Yeoupe, is manifestly
caused by my objection to the marriage he proposed
to me. He wishes to drive me to despair; and I,
who am in a subordinate situation to him, have no
means of making head against him. Miss Pe is
no more. I have not been able to discover any
traces of Lo Mengli or his sister I am alone; I have
neither father, mother, wife, nor any other woman
in my house. I set no value upon riches; and shall
I remain without any compensation, to lead the life
of a beast of burden, merely through attachment to
this scarf of black gauze, and for the hollow plea-
sure of seeing my name in the list of persons in
place Besides, I have in my superior a dangerous
adversary. As I am but a short time in office, he
has not yet been able to find any sufficient grounds
to attack me; but if I should continue to exercise
my function, he will, sooner or later, discover some
trifling pretext for an accusation; and then, if I
wish to rid myself of him, I must exhaust all my
resources. The best thing I can do is to send in
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
189
immediately my resignation. By so doing those
who surround us will see that it is this insupportable
man that has forced me to take this step; and as to
my profession, if I at some future time wish to re-
sume it, the thing will not be difficult."
As soon as he had resolved on this measure, he
despatched successively all the causes before his
tribunal. He answered all the memorials that had
been addressed to him, and then wrote a letter,
which he sent by one of his officers to the prefect,
to beg of him to make known his resignation to the
three directors, as also to the intendants and other
magistrates of the province. As he had no family,
he took with him only Siaohi, and the servants who
had accompanied him when he came to take pos-
session of his office, and the baggage necessary
for his journey; then, very early in the morn-
ing, he set off, telling his officers that the provin-
cial judge had given him a commission relative to
his function to execute, and forbidding them to
follow him. He went out by the gate Tsiantang,
with the intention of taking a boat to return to
Kinling. But when he found himself outside the
city, and on the borders of the lake, he made the
following reflections. I am travelling without
any determined view," said he to himself. " When
the prefect, and the two sub-prefects, shall hear of
my departure, they will not fail of sending persons
in pursuit of me. If I follow this route, they will
infallibly overtake me and it would be a great an-
noyance to me, to be obliged to return. I had
better cross the river at Tsianting, and go round by
Chanyin, which is near the grotto of the emperor
Ju. I shall remain there for some days ; and when
190
JU-KIAO-LI:
they see that it is impossible to find me, they will
necessarily let the business drop; and then I can
safely resume my journey without fearing to meet
with any obstacle."
Conformably to this plan, he took a little boat,
and had himself rowed to the mouth of the river.
From thence he continued his journey, slowly, on
foot. He had not proceeded more than a mile *,
when he perceived a great monastery, before the
gate of which was a grove of pines and thuyas,
which cast a pleasant shade about the place. Sse
Yeoupe sat himself down upon a large stone, which
was dry and clean. He had been some time re-
posing himself, when he saw pass by one of the
soothsayers who offer up divination prayers. On
examining this person, Sse Yeoupe perceived
A square hat soaked with the sweat of the wearer's
brain,
A water green garment, through the holes of which his
shoulders were seen,
Black spots here and there upon his face,
Two large tumours at each side of his neck,
A divining box rattling between his fingers,
A placard suspended without a clasp from his loins ;
An exterior, in fine, that had nothing prepossessing,
But under which were talents capable of driving the
genii to despair.
Sse Yeoupe paid no further attention to the
soothsayer, whose appearance was so repulsive,
and whose garments were so ragged; he had let
him pass, when his eyes were attracted by the little
placard, suspended to his loins, upon which was
written, in seven characters, hermit of gratitude
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
191
divine instrument of prayer. At the sight of this,
a thought instantly occurred to him. "I recol-
lect," said he to himself, that last year, when I
quitted home, I met a man who borrowed my
whip, in order to enable him to find his wife. This
man told me, that he had been advised to do so by
the hermit of gratitude. Can it be the same sooth-
sayer who has just passed? When I was at the
hamlet of Keouyoung, my intention was to go in
search of this hermit. Shall I now let slip the occa-
sion that offers itself?"
He immediately ordered one of his servants to
go after the man, and engage him to come back.
The hermit complied with the request, and ap-
proaching Sse Yeoupe, saluted him with his hand,
sat down upon a stone, and asked him, " if he wished
to have some prayers said."
Yes," replied Sse Yeoupe, "that is my inten-
tion; but tell me, I pray you, master, have you
fixed your residence in this place Or are you but
lately arrived here?"
66 I wander about in every direction, saying
prayers," replied the hermit: " how could I have a
fixed residence ? I came here during the autumn
of last year."
"And in what place were you last spring ?" asked
Sse Yeoupe.
" Last spring," said the hermit, " I was in the
hamlet of Keouyoung, where I remained for six
months."
Sse, convinced by this that it was the man he
desired to see, was very much gratified by the
circumstance, and said to him, " Master, whilst
you were in the hamlet of Keouyoung, there was a
192
JU-KIAO-LI:
man searching for his wife, who asked you to offer
up some prayers for his success. You assured him
that, if he went to the distance of forty miles, he
would meet a horseman, whom if he asked for his
whip, his wife would soon after be found. Do you
ecollect this circumstance ?"
'How is it possible for me to recollect all the
prayers that I offer up every day?" replied the her-
mit. Then, after a moment's reflection, he con-
tinued-" Yes, yes, I have a confused recollection
of it; I remember that the trigramma of that day
was that of union ; union means a meeting; union
means also a marriage. Thus every meeting is a
kind of marriage. It was for this reason that I
told him to pursue his researches; but I know
not if he found his wife. How did you come to
the knowledge of the circumstance ?"
"The person whom the man met was myself,"
replied Sse Yeoupe. "In order to give me a sub-
stitute for my whip, he climbed up a large willow-
tree to break off a branch, when he saw his wife,
who had been carried away by some men, and
brought into a neighbouring convent; it was in this
way that he recovered her. Your prayers have
something divine in them, and you have justified
the title that you bear."
All that," replied the hermit, " is owing to four
holy personages, Fouhi, Wenwang, Tcheoukoung,
and Confucius *, who have invented the admirable
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
193
art of combinations. What merit have I then ?
All that I know is, to reason and decide conformably
to the rules."
" But that is precisely the difficulty," replied
Sse Yeoupe. "Now, master," he continued, " I
should wish you to offer up a prayer for me."
The hermit presented his divining box to Sse
Yeoupe, saying : " Now seek for the foundations of
truth."
Sse Yeoupe took the box, pointed it towards hea-
ven, then to the earth, and, after repeating an in-
ternal prayer, returned it to the hermit. The latter
took it in his hand, shook it several times in various
directions, all the while muttering between his teeth
some inarticulate sounds, and then threw out the
rods. There were three lines outside, three lines
inside, and several other figures. The hermit, hav-
ing finished reciting his formula, exclaimed-" What
a singular circumstance ! We were just now speak-
ing of the trigramma of union; and behold, it
is exactly that that presents itself. I know not, sir,
in what sense it may relate to you."
" There is a marriage in question," replied Sse
Yeoupe.
" Well !" said the hermit, ' you recollect that I
194
JU-KIAO-LI:
said, a short time ago, that union meant both
meeting and marriage. The marriage in question
has already taken root. There cannot be a more
fortunate destiny. You see it before your eyes;
you have only to speak your wishes, no further
effort on your part will be necessary. The two
figures, inside and outside, denote a particularity
singularly auspicious; by one marriage you will
obtain two wives."
Sse Yeoupe began to laugh. "It is possible to
have two wives, one after the other, " said he
66 but how am I to obtain two at the same time, and
by one marriage?"
The two figures are opposite to each other,
face to face," replied the hermit. " They have
formed themselves into that position. If one of the
wives were to precede the other, that would not be
an extraordinary circumstance."
"But if I am to obtain them both by one marriage,
they must be two sisters, who may be married in
the same house."
" One of the figures appertains to hearen, the
other is connected with the wind; thus, though
they denote two sisters, yet one of the figures
being to the north, and the other to the south, it
follows that the persons implied are not sisters by
birth*."
"Master," said Sse Yeoupe, " to be sincere with
you, for the last two years I have been thinking
of marriage, and have cast my eyes upon two
girls of different families : these may be the north
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
195
and south of which you spoke ; but now one of
these persons is unfortunately no more, and I know
not what has become of the second if there be
others that should wish to unite themselves to
me, I shall never be able to find one to my liking.
So you see I have no hope during this life to enter
into the nuptial chamber. It is very easy for you
to speak to me thus; but I fear, master, that you
are amusing yourself at my expense."
"My profession is to recite divination-prayers
why then should I occupy myself in practising silly
jests ? I should not dare to tell you anything that
did not result from the operation; but if you
wish, I shall make to disappear that which has
appeared."
Sse Yeoupe replied, laughing-" Behold me alone
in this place : I see no vestige of what I am pur-
suing. Where should I go to ? Since you say the
thing is before my eyes, be kind enough to tell me
in what direction 1 am to look for it."
The hermitstretched forth his hand, and described
a circle.
"Here is a very extraordinary thing," said he.
" The two ladies are in the country of Kinling; but
to find them, you must cross the river of Tsiantang,
and go to Chanyin, near to the grotto of the em-
peror Ju. It is "there that, by continuing your re-
searches, you will infallibly meet them within the
space of half a month.
" That is still more impossible," exclaimed Sse
Yeoupe. I may, according to my former plan, go
in search of these persons, and make proposals of
marriage to them, if their merit and beauty be
196
JU-KIAO-LI:
really remarkable; but how is it possible that the
affair should ever be concluded, if one party is
in one place, and the other in a different one ?"
"The prognostication of the trigrammas is ex-
tremely favourable," answered the hermit. "The
two ladies are extremely beautiful; they are, in fine,
exactly as you would wish them. So, sir, do not
miss the opportunity. If you let such a connexion
escape you, you will never again meet with the
like."
Notwithstanding all you have said, if I set
out and cross the river, it will be of no use, for I
know no one in that country where am I to pur-
sue my researches?"
"Union signifies meeting," replied the hermit.
6. You will have no occasion to make any researches.
The meeting will take place without your seek-
ing it."
" In what rank is the family ?" asked Sse
Yeoupe.
"This also offers a singularity. At this very mo-
ment, the family is of an ordinary rank; but when
the time shall arrive for concluding the marriage,
it will be of a very noble and elevated rank."
" Your present predictions contain things as
opposed to each other as is the lance to the shield :
may you not have committed some error ?"
"I have already told you, that I am not one of
the genii; my business is only to prophecy after
the rules of reason You will yourself be con-
vinced of their excellence when you shall see that
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
197
the effects correspond to them. I myself know
nothing more at this moment."
" I recollect that, in the prediction which you
gave the man who was looking for his wife, you
described even the colour of my garments. Can
you also make known to me, before I leave this,
the appearance of the person I am to meet?"
The hermit drew another circle with his hand.
" At noon, on the third day of the cycle, after leaving
this, you will meet a respectable old man, with a
noble countenance, and clothed in a white linen
garment. He will be the person in question. The
advantages of this connexion are such that you
might traverse the whole empire and not meet
another equal to it. Be very careful, sir, not
to miss it! If you do, you shall repent when too
late."
"Tell me some other thing that your operation
indicates," said Sse Yeoupe.
"My prophetic operations are performed one at
a time only. They cannot serve two ends. If you
wish to consult me upon some other subject, you
must throw the chances a second time."
Be it so," replied Sse Yeoupe; " let us per-
form a new operation." And he began saying
another prayer. The hermit got ready his figures,
and repeated his prophetic formula. The trigramma
that came up was the fifty-fifth. " This figure,"
said he, " denotes literary illustration what is it
you wish to know ?"
I wish to know if I shall be restored to the
rank I had obtained," said Sse Yeoupe.
" That rank is not lost," replied the hermit.
198
JU-KIAO-LP:
" There is therefore no necessity to restore you
to it."
Lost it is," said Sse Yeoupe.
It is not, it is not, I tell you !"
"
Tell me, I pray you, what this rank may be,"
said Sse Yeoupe.
Success at the principal examination is not
worth the trouble of talking about," replied the
hermit: ' but the figure that denotes literary illus-
tration, most usually identifies itself with the degree
of academician of the great college."
Sse Yeoupe burst into a fit of laughter. "Master,"
he cried," your operation is most incontestibly
erroneous. I had a place in the magistracy, which
I have resigned; therefore my rank is lost. If it
were restored to me, that would not make me an
academician ; and if I should he named academician.
I should be in a different rank from that which I
have lost."
The hermit drew another circle with his hand.
It is certainly the rank of doctor of the aca-
demy," said he; " I have not made any miscalcu-
lation, and I should sooner be inclined to think that
the place in the magistracy was conferred on you
through some mistake."
Sse Yeoupe, with the air of a person who is doubt-
ful whether he should put confidence in what has
been told him, said-" Well, I have given you a
great deal of trouble !" And he ordered one of his
servants to give the hermit half an ounce of silver
for his prophetic operations. The hermit took it,
and disappeared in an instant.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
199
The world is a machine regulated beforehand :
The men of the age are unacquainted with its springs
But at the winding up of events
Felicity or unhappiness will make them known.
" The recollection of this prophetic operation
was mingled, in Sse Yeoupe's mind, with doubt and
confidence; and as the result it pointed at agreed
with his first intention, which was to cross the river,
he took a little boat, and had himself landed upon
the other bank of the Tsiantang, in order to proceed
towards Chanyin. Amongst the results of this new
journey will be seen that mirror, the brilliancy of
which cannot be tarnished ; the polished jasper, and
the sacred mountain, which will facilitate the access
to the nuptial bed.
Without the aid of destiny, a journey of a thousand
miles would be useless;
With its succour the object of search is found at arm's-
length.
Fate is a wilful and capricious child
Who has a thousand bye ways for attaining his object.
The next chapter will make known if Sse Yeoupe
did really meet the personage of whom he went in
search.
200
JU-KIAO-LI.
CHAPTER XVIII.
MEETING OF A SON-IN-LAW DURING AN EXCURSION
IN THE MIDST OF THE MOUNTAINS AND LAKES.
" Everything is in the end cleared up, and men of congenial dispositions
meet. But in the bosum of sorrow how is H possible to speak of the
nuptial mirror? Deprived of the barmony of the lute and guitar, of what
importance is the difference of perfume between the laseras and
the
vanilla ? To a connoisseur the smell of salt fish is not fetid. What proof
of penetration would there be in telling the hour when the clock strikes ?
Peyo really met with a generous steed. He discovered him at a glance
amongst a number of inferior ones."
SINCE Sse Yeoupe's meeting with the hermit, the
prophetic operations he had seen him perform, and
the precise explanations he had given him, failed
not to inspire him with some confidence, and he
consequently without further hesitation directed
his course towards the west. But fearing to be
followed, he concealed his real name, and took that
of Lieou (willow) in remembrance of the verses
which Miss Pe had written upon the vernal willows.
He was therefore known to the persons he met in
his journey, except as the bachelor Lieou.
In a few days he arrived at Chanyin, where the
country offered prospects of the most imposing and
truly rural beauty. Through a thousand vallies
ran streams that seemed to rival one with the other.
Admirable points of view succeeded each other
without end and without interruption. Sse Yeoupe
was very much struck by this spectacle; and to enjoy
it more at his leisure, he went to lodge in an old
monastery called The Temple of the Emperor Ju.
From thence he set out every morning and evening
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
201
upon his rural excursions. It happened that the
counsellor of state Pe, on his return from visiting
the grotto of Ju, came to lodge in the same convent.
Both one day went out after breakfast, to enjoy the
surrounding prospects, when they unexpectedly met.
Sse Yeoupe, on turning his head, saw an old man
with a cap of linen-cloth on his head, and clothed
in one of those white linen mantles worn by the
members of religious communities. His air an-
nounced a person of distinguished qualities, and far
above the ordinary race of men. Sse Yeoupe, to
whom occurred at the moment the prediction of the
hermit of gratitude, was so affected by the sight of
this personage, that he remained motionless, without
being able to move forward a single step. Pe, on
his side, remarked that Sse Yeoupe had, joined to
the appearance of youth, a prepossessing exterior,
and all the signs of a person of eminent merit. The
sight of the young man gave him great pleasure;
and as he perceived that Sse Yeoupe had stopped
to look at him, he himself remained stationary.
Both kept their eyes fixed on each other, and, after
mutual salutations, they still continued to regard
each other without being able to move away. At
length Pe began to laugh. "My dear sir," said he,
' you are here alone, enjoying the pleasures of a
walk; to wander amidst lakes and mountains is the
recreation of great geniuses."
Sse Yeoupe replied, smiling-" I do not aspire
to the quality of a man of genius: I confine
myself to following the footsteps of your lord-
ship."
Pe saw upon the side of the road several lofty
pines, which offered an agreeable shade. We are
202
JU-KIAO-L1:
country folks, inhabitants of the mountains and
borders of the lakes; why should we not sit down
and converse for a moment at the foot of these
pines?"
"There is nothing I desire more," replied Sse
Yeoupe; "but I fear I shall make but a poor re-
turn to your obliging proposition."
They both then walked towards the pines, and
made choice of two large stones to sit upon. Ssc
Yeoupe commenced the conversation. "Will your
iordship," said he, "permit me to ask you your
name, that of your country, and the motive that has
led you here?'
"My name is Hoangfou," replied Pe, 'my country
is Kinling; I have come here to admire the beauties
of these mountains, and visit the grotto of Ju. And
you, my dear sir, how do you call yourself? What
business has brought you here? By your accent I
should take you to be my countryman."
"My family name is Lieou," said Sse. " It is
likewise a taste for the view of lakes and mountains
that has brought me here. I am in fact from Kin-
ling, though I have not had the honour of making
your acquaintance in my native town. It is a piece
of good fortune for me to have the advantage of
seeing you here, at a moment when I had least
reason to expect it."
" I am an old man, of no use to the world, and
the recreation which I take here, in the midst of the
mountains, cannot be blamed. But you, Mr Lieou,
who appear made to mount the steed of gold, or to
sit in the hall of jasper*, how happens it that you
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
203
have been able to come here on a journey of plea-
sure? ?"
"I have read," replied Sse Yeoupe, "that the
greatest of our historians * had travelled over the
whole empire, visited the most celebrated moun-
tains and the noblest rivers, and by that means had
furnished himself with an ample provision of images
and recollections, whereby he was enabled to mingle,
in his animated and brilliant style, all the wonders
of our days with those of antiquity: the same thing
may now he said of your lordship. As for me, who
have advanced but a short way in my studies, I
have some little inkling of the taste to which you
allude; but I am not, and I blush to say it, the man
you suppose me."
" Great views belong only to superior talents,"
observed Pe, " and it does not suit an old man like
me, enfeebled by age, to entertain such. But a
young man, such as you, has duties to fulfil : are
you alone in the world, that you should consider
yourself exempted from these duties?"
"I have had the misfortune to lose my father and
mother; I am an orphan, and unmarried. This it
is that permits me to follow my own inclinations.
I do not, however, receive with the less respect the
advice you have been good enough to give me; and
I am infinitely indebted to your frankness."
Ah! is such the case ?" said Pe.
" Permit me, my lord," interrupted Sse Yeoupe,
"
to inquire where your mansion is situated at Kin-
204
JU-KIAO-L1:
ling, that on my return I may make it my duty to
call on you."
"I live in the country at a village called Kinchi,
sixty or seventy miles from the town."
" Ah ! you reside in the village of Kinchi; do
you happen to know then Pe Thaibiouan, who is
in the department of the public works?" asked Sse
Yeoupe.
At this question Pe could not prevent himself
from smiling internally. "There is the question !"
thought he. "Can this man be a second Tchaotsi-
anli? Pe Thaihiouan," continued he, " is one of
my relations, and I consequently know him: but,
Mr Lieou, since you ask after him, you must of
course be acquainted with him."
"I am not acquainted with him, but I highly
respect his excellent character, and that is the
reason that I inquire about him."
"My relation Pe has a good deal of haughtiness
and reserve in his character. How has he been able
to gain your affection?" asked Pe.
" A vulgar man is never reserved, and haughti-
ness would sit very ill upon him who has no ta-
lents ; but both one and the other become a man
of letters. The affection I have for him is there-
fore well founded," replied Sse Yeoupe. "His lord-
ship, however, in my opinion, has one defect."
" What defect?" asked Pe.
" His judgment is not very sound, and he allows
himself sometimes to be duped by knaves," said
Sse Yeoupe.
" True," said Pe, "I have more than once made
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
205
the same remark; but, Mr Lieou, since you are
not personally acquainted with him, how do you
come to know him so well?"
"
The lord Pe had a daughter, who for merit and
beauty. has never had an equal. You should know
that, my lord, since you are related to him."
" Yes, I know something about it," replied Pe.
" Well, having such a daughter, he ought na-
turally to have occupied himself in choosing a son-
in-law; but he sought for one only amongst rich
young men devoid of merit, and paid not the
slightest attention to men of talent who were within
his view. This is what makes me say that he is not
possessed of a sound judgment."
" Have you been to see my relation, Mr Lieou ?"
asked Pe.
" I called at his house, but could not see him,"
answered Sse Yeoupe.
Well, Mr Lieou, do not form too unfavourable
an opinion of my relation. Chance has not been
his friend, since he has not met you had he known
you, he would not have failed to recognise in you
the accomplishments of Tseutou."
" I by no means merit this praise," said Sse
Yeoupe ; " but assuredly the person whom he in-
vited to his house was not an accomplished man."
These words gave birth to a reflection in Pe's
mind. The affairs of this world have a singular
march," thought he. "I committed an oversight with
regard to Tchangfanjou, and every one knows it;
and when I have fixed my choice upon Sse Yeoupe,
no one can tell me where he is. Upon this occa-
sion it may truly be said, 'that good news goes
not outside the door, while bad travels a thousand
206
JU-KIAO-LI:
miles
off.'" Then, addressing Sse Yeoupe, he
said, " Did you know at the college of Kinling a
student named Sse Yeoupe, Mr Lieou?"
This question astonished Sse Yeoupe a little.
" Why does he put such a question to me?" said
he to himself. " Sse Yeoupe and I were fellow-
students ; he is one of my best friends-why does
your lordship inquire after him?"
"
Permit me to ask you another question," said
Pe. " Tell me, I pray you, what degree of talent
has this Sse Yeoupe ?"
"
He has not more than I have," replied Sse
Yeoupe, smiling.
" One may judge favourably of him, if he de-
serve to be compared to you," replied Pe. "My
relation told me that this young Mr Sse was the
person to whom he had determined to give his
daughter, and that all others had disappeared
like benumbed flies or butterflies, which the hur-
ricane had swept away. Will you now say that his
judgment was not sound?"
On hearing these words Sse Yeoupe felt a mingled
sensation of surprise and joy that tempered his un-
utterable regret. "What," he exclaimed, "I have
then been guilty of most inexcusable indiscre-
tion!"
After this conversation, they talked of the beauty
of the surrounding country. They remained sitting
in the same place till the approach of night, when
they arose, and walked back to the monastery,
where they separated.
The glances of two fine eyes never fatigue;
A conversation between two upright hearts is prolonged
without effort.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
207
What is to be seen beyond these willows, over the
mountains ?
Some birds, which the twilight calls from the summit
of the clouds.
On returning to his room, Sse Yeoupe gave him-
self up to his reflections. "The lord Pe," said he,
had then given me a place in his breast. Had I
unceremoniously presented myself to him, and so-
licited a connexion with his family, I should not
have met with a refusal. The idea of going to ask
Gou Touian to intercede for me, was nothing more
than a desire of acquiring consideration-a desire
that has made me lose months and years, and has
been the cause of my returning too late, when sor-
row and resentment have conducted Miss Pe to the
nine fountains
After such a misfortune, though
you should die of grief, Sse Yeoupe, yet it would not
atone for your crime; but I thought not at first of
this vain glory it was Lo Mengli, by his reiterated
exhortations, who made me think it my duty to seek
it. The exhortations of Lo Mengli, sprung from a
good motive," he continued. " He assured me
that, once in station, all things would become
easy to me. Who could have foreseen that Miss
Pe would have been so soon snatched away, and
that he himself would have disappeared without
leaving any trace behind? No, certainly, my mar-
riage is not written in the book of destiny : hence
all these disappointments and woes. Only some
days ago that hermit told me that, on coming here,
I should meet some one; and in fact I have met
this old man. He even told me the day of the
calendar, and it is precisely to-day, the third of the
208
JU-KIAO-LI:
cycle. The more I think of this, the more incon-
ceivable it appears to me. Can the success of my
marriage depend in any way upon this old man?"
Sse Yeoupe passed the whole of the night amidst
a confusion of ideas and reflections. The next
morning he hastened to write a visiting card in a
respectful form, and called upon Pe. The latter
detained him; they payed their tribute to antiquity,
and talked of literature cup in hand. In this
manner they spent the whole of the day, and did
not separate till evening.
Pe, in his turn, came to visit Sse Yeoupe, who
kept him to partake of a collation. From this
moment they were continually together, either com-
posing, or enjoying the sight of the flowers, and
the aspect of the waters. Their dispositions were
congenial, and their hearts in perfect accord.
They were inseparable during the entire of the
day. "They boast of Sse Yeoupe's talents," said
Pe to himself, " but I have not seen his person.
I have now passed several days with Mr Lieou.
I have been able to study profoundly his character;
he has very eminent talents, and most varied
acquirements ; his exterior is agreeable, and his
countenance denotes a man of distinction. In
the two capitals, and in all the provinces I have
travelled through, I have passed in review a great
many young men, but I never met one who united
so many qualities as Mr Lieou; and, moreover, he
is not yet married. If I let slip this occasion, he
would be justified in accusing me of unsoundness of
judgment. There is but one difficulty if I con-
clude only the marriage of Houngiu, my niece
Mengli will ask me where she shall be able to find
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
209
a husband equally worthy of her; and she and her
mother will complain that my affection has been
measured according to the degree of relationship.
If, on the contrary, Ispeak first of Mengli, and leave
to another time my search after a husband for
Houngiu, it will be making a sacrifice of my per-
sonal sentiments. Both cousins possess equal talents
and equal beauty. Their characters are in perfect
harmony. The best thing that can be done is to
give them both in marriage to young Lieou, and
by this means all our affairs will be terminated.
What a happy event! This young man, from what I
see, possesses talents that will one day conduct
him to the academical gardens. Besides, reputation
is not what occupies me at present. No one but
he will suit me for this marriage."
He accordingly addressed himself to Sse Yeoupe,
and said, " I have something to say, which I ought
naturally to engage some one else to speak to you
about. But you and I are above the common
customs of the world; I have a great desire to open
my mind directly to you: may I do so, my dear sir ?"
"Whatinstructions have you to give me? I can re-
ceive them only with respect," replied Sse Yeoupe.
"
Nothing more than what I am going to tell
you. I have reflected often, Mr Lieou, upon what
you told me the other day, that Pe Thaîhiouan had
been, in various and distant places, seeking for a
son-in-law, and had neglected observing those de-
serving persons who were in his neighbourhood.
It is my opinion that you were perfectly right.
Now 1 also have a daughter, and moreover a niece.
I will not permit myself to represent them to you
as accomplished persons; but there is very little
210
JU-KIAO-LI:
difference between them and the daughter of Pe
Thaîhiouan. Now I find in you a young man full
of merit, a scholar who has not his equal in the em-
pire ; and, as it fortunately happens, you are un-
married. If I did not express the desire of draw-
ing together the bonds of marriage with you, and
if hereafter I should find it impossible to meet with
a second son-in-law equal to you, what raillery
should I not have to undergo from those who ridi-
cule Pe Thaihiouan Mr Lieou, do you find your-
self inclined like me towards this connexion?'
When Sse Yeoupe heard Pe talk to him of the
double marriage of his daughter and his niece, and
of those circumstances which agreed so perfectly,
and without a single title of difference with the
predictions of the hermit, he felt confounded with
surprise. However, he hastened to reply-" Let
not your lordship regard as impolite the language
I shall make use of in the first moment of extreme
emotion. What! it is with you that such a project
takes its origin. It is you who are willing to confer
the honour of your alliance upon a poor student
like me! How can I have deserved such a favour ?
I have however a scruple upon my heart, and I do
not know if I ought to permit myself to make it
known to you."
" Why not?" said Pe. " When friends are to-
gether, they should explain themselves to each
other with the most entire candour."
"It is true that I have yet no establishment,"
said Sse Yeoupe; " and yet I had made a proposal
of marriage to two girls. One of them is like a
broken lute: she has seen the nine fountains. The
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
211
other has fled to escape persecution, and I have
been able to get no information respecting her.
As to her who is no more, though it is not in my
power to restore to her the soul she has been de-
prived of, yet the fidelity I vowed to her requires
that I should never marry another. And as to the
second who is living, if the lost pearl should be
found, I fear that her return would prove an obsta-
cle to the offer you make me. Such are the senti-
ments that animate me. Deign, my lord, to teach
me how to regulate them."
In announcing your intention not to marry,
because she whom you wished to make your wife is
no more, you hold the language of a faithful and
strongly-attached heart. But you are young, Mr
Lieou; and you would reflect upon what the conse-
quences of that resolution may be, if no barrier be
opposed to the impetuosity of the passions. If the
lost pearl be restored to you, it is but just that you
should fulfil your engagements. But should she
never come back, ought you on that account to de-
vote yourself to celibacy?"
" Your advice is so full of wisdom, that I must
needs conform myself to it respectfully. But de-
void of merit and talent as I am, I fear that the
choice you make of me will bring but little honour
to the threshold of your house."
" For a poor house, like mine, it is an instance of
singular good fortune, to connect itself with a sage
like you," replied Pe.
" I must then accept the mark of goodness with
which you deign to honour me. But how are the
necessary arrangements to be made ?"
" A promise once given endures for the remainder
212
JU-KIAO-LI:
of life; and as to the acts and other usual prelimi-
naries, all shall be in readiness when the day of
marriage arrives."
Both were equally satisfied at having concluded
this engagement. They remained together three
or four days more, to enjoy the pleasures of the
country. Pe then was the first to express a wish to
depart. " I am now a long while from home," said
he; " I must return to-morrow. When shall you
think of returning, Mr Lieou ?"
"I have nothing to detain me here," replied Sse
Yeoupe: " I shall set out soon after the departure
of your lordship. We shall not be separated more
than fifteen days. I shall go and ask for you in the
village where you live."
" At the appointed time the house will be swept,
and every thing put in order to receive you," said
Pe. Thus finished their conversation, and the next
morning Pe took leave and departed.
The departure of Pe left Sse Yeoupe to his own
reflections. "There is something really supernatural
in the predictions of this hermit. Every word of
what he announced to me has been verified. But
I cannot explain to myself what he meant relative to
my promotion, when he assured me that the degree
of academician had not been taken from me."
He passed a few days more in wandering over
the country; he then recollected that it was time
for him to resume his journey; and, imagining that
he should not now be recognised, he ordered a
servant to hire him a boat, and he returned by
the same road he came, again crossing the river
Tsiantang.
Now it must be known that when governor Yang
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
213
had at various times endeavoured to embarrass
and perplex Sse Yeoupe, he had no other object in
view than to oblige him to consent to the proposal
of marriage that he had made him. However, Sse
Yeoupe took, of his own accord, the resolution to
resign, and remove to a distance. When the pre-
fect, and the sub-prefect, came to inform him of this
event, he was a little troubled, and ordered these
magistrates to send their people in every direction
in pursuit of the fugitive; but in vain-they could
find no traces of him. The prefect and sub-pre-
fect returned to give an account of their ill suc-
cess. This disappointment made him reflect.
" Sse Yeoupe is under my jurisdiction," thought
he; "but during the very short time he has been in
office, he has committed no errors in the exercise
of his functions. Although it does not appear that
I have obliged him to resign, yet in fact I am
the cause of his resignation. This, the intendant
and judge of the province know very well ; and
when Sse Fanghoei, who is at court, shall be in-
formed of it, his resentment will, no doubt, be
excited against me. This is altogether an awk-
ward business."
He was occupied with these ideas, when the ga-
zette was brought to him. The governor opened
it; and the first paragraph that met his view was
a declaration from the minister of the household,
acknowledging an error which he had made ;
which declaration was accompanied by an imperial
decree to the following effect;-that Sse Yeoupe
having obtained the first place at the second exami-
nation for the degree of doctor, he should have
214
JU-KIAO-LI
been nominated to one of the posts appertaining to
the court, instead of being sent as a judge into
Tchekiang. Such conduct deserved exemplary
chastisement : but as the minister had himself re-
cognised his error, he merited thereby some in-
dulgence. In consequence, Sse Yeoupe was to
be nominated to the place he had merited, and
another named to fill the office of judge in Tche-
kiang.
Sse Yeoupe would, in fact, have been designated
to occupy one of the posts appertaining to the court,
had not some of the grandees, jealous of his ele-
vation, obliged the ministers of the household to
appoint him a judge in Tchekiang but afterwards
the members of the grand college refused to allow
the regulations to be thus infringed. Two persons,
they said, had been chosen to receive the title of
academician, and there was no reason why one of
them should be sent to fill a situation in the magis-
tracy. They even wished to present a public me-
morial on the subject, and bring to trial the mem-
bers belonging to the ministry of the household,
for prevarication and infraction of the laws. The
minister of the household, becoming alarmed, had
no other resource left than to acknowledge his
error, and make a declaration, the effect of which
was the decree above mentioned.
The restoration of Sse Yeoupe 10 the degree of
doctor of the grand academy was by no means
agreeable to governor Yang. He feared that Sse
Yeoupe would treasure up in his heart a vengeful
feeling against him, and that, on his return to court,
he might speak of him in a manner not at all ta his
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
215
advantage. He therefore sent out other persons
in search of him, and left no effort untried to dis-
cover him.
It happened one day, that the prefect had in-
vited a party to meet him on the western lake.
His company not having yet arrived, this magis-
trate was alone in his bark, looking out of the win-
dow. It was the very day that Sse Yeoupe, after
crossing the river, had embarked upon the lake in
a little boat which was going from the south to
the north. As he passed close to the prefect's
large bark, he was recognised by that magistrate's
attendants, who cried out, as they pointed to him,
There is the lord Sse!"
The prefect raised his head, and at the first
glance recognised Sse Yeoupe ; he instantly or-
dered the lord Sse's boat to be stopped, and came
himself to the end of his bark to receive him. The
guards soon overtook Sse Yeoupe's little boat, and
brought it underneath the prow of the bark. Sse
Yeoupe, seeing himself thus discovered by the pre-
fect, and no means of escape offering, was obliged
to ascend the magistrate's bark. The prefect re-
ceived him very politely. " My lord Sse," said
he, why did you go away without taking leave
of us? In how many places have I sent to look
for you
My indolent and inert disposition, which ren-
ders me very unfit for business," replied Sse
Yeoupe, was the cause of my so precipitately
resigning, as I wished to avoid committing those
faults which would have inevitably occurred, had
I continued in the administration of justice. Such
a proceeding was, I think, just and reasonable;
216
JU-KIAO-LI:
but have you really, Mr Prefect, given yourself the
trouble of thinking of me ?"
The prefect immediately invited Sse Yeoupe to
pass into the cabin of his bark: he saluted him,
and having ordered an arm-chair to be placed at
the upper end, he engaged his guest to sit in it.
Sse Yeoupe refused, and wished to take his seat
to the east or to the west; but the prefect, address-
ing him, said-" My lord, you ought naturally to
sit in the place of honour; to refuse it, would
be shewing too much humility upon your part."
Why do you change your manner of speaking
to me?" asked Sse Yeoupe. "Why should I not
remain in my place, and why should you give up
yours?"
"A doctor of the grand academy has his prero-
gatives, which are superior to those of a functionary
such as am," replied the prefect. "I cannot now
permit myself to act towards you in the same man-
ner as formerly."
On hearing this, Sse Yeoupe in the greatest as-
tonishment exclaimed-" Since I have resigned
my office, I am now without employment; what do
you mean by talking to me of the grand aca-
demy?"
" It appears, my lord, that you have not as yet
seen the gazette. The minister of the household
committed a mistake in appointing your excellency
to a place in the magistracy; but your academy re-
sisted this infraction of the regulations, and wished
to bring the point to a public trial, till the minister,
thus hotly pressed, resolved to make a declaration
acknowledging his error. There has been already
an imperial decree, re-establishing things as they
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
217
ought to be. Respect and joy, my lord Allow me
to offer you my felicitations."
This intelligence caused great joy and surprise
to the heart of Sse Yeoupe. " What a superna-
tural character have these predictions of the her-
mit had !" said he to himself.
Both sat down, and continued to converse for
some time, after having taken tea. Sse Yeoupe then
wished to get up and go away, but the prefect
would not consent to this. "Since your excel-
lency's departure," said he, "the governor has
been very much annoyed. He was very angry with
me for not having detained you. Yesterday he
told the sub-prefects and me to cause you to be
sought for in every direction. Now that I have met
you, I could not take upon myself to let you go
away so easily."
He immediately ordered the bark to be loosened
from its moorings, and conveyed Sse Yeoupe to
the. monastery of Tchaoking, where he requested
him to remain in the hall of meditations. He
picked out four of his guards to accompany him,
and then returned to his bark, to entertain his
company.
In the mean time, the news of Sse Yeoupe's re-
appearance had been communicated to the autho-
rities. The two sub-prefects were the first to come,
followed by all the subordinate officers of the pre-
fecture, to visit Sse Yeoupe. The next morning,
the intendants and the magistrates came to pay
their homage; and a short time after, the governor
Yang came to visit him. Immediately after the
salutations, he began to excuse himself; he then
218
JU-KIAO-L1:
ordered a collation to be prepared upon the lake,
and shewed himself extremely attentive and eager
to please. Sse Yeoupe conducted himself towards
him as if he had still been under his jurisdiction,
and evinced neither pride nor resentment.
Officers are divided into high and low :
With regard to magistrates, it is their functions that
must be looked to.
It is really like a bucket in a well,
One is unexpectedly now at the bottom, then at the
top.
During this period, Tchangfanjou, instead of re-
turning home, had prolonged his stay on the bor-
ders of the lake. When he heard speak of the
elevation of Sse Yeoupe, he could not help think-
ing of what he had done. " What " said he to
himself, " a governor who, but a short time ago,
treated him soill, now gives him such a reception.
It may be very truly said, that men's manners
change according to situations. And you, good
Tchang, will you be foolish enough to make an
enemy of him ? During the intercourse I have
had with him, he has never done me any harm.
The only thing between us is this little affair rela-
tive to Miss Pe. But now that there no longer
exists any hope for me, why should [ not again
direct his views towards her, and thereby make
a friend of him ? If I restore Miss Pe to him,
he will be enraptured ; and I must certainly bene-
fit by a friendship with a doctor of the grand
academy."
Being resolved upon this point, he went to pay a
visit to Sse Yeoupe. After the usual salutations,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
219
Tchangfanjou, addressing him, said-" Do you
know, my lord, what is the motive of my visit
to-day?"
"I cannot tell," replied Sse Yeoupe.
" I come, my lord, to ask your pardon, and to
felicitate you," replied Tchangfanjou.
"What necessity is there for pardon between
friends who have never injured each other? And as
to my promotion, an office is but an office, be it at
the court or in the provinces; therefore there is no
cause for felicitation."
" It is not upon that account I come to congra-
tulate you; it is upon another subject that will give
you the greatest joy."
I hope then that you will communicate it to
me," said Sse Yeoupe.
" The intelligence that I gave you the other
day of Miss Pe's death was false; and the fault
I am come to ask pardon for is, to have told
it to you. Are you not charmed by what I
now tell you? That is my reason for congratu-
lating you."
"How! exclaimed Sse Yeoupe, enraptured.
"The truth is, that she is not yet dead," re-
plied Tchangfanjou, laughing. "What I told you
was only in jest."
" And what could have been the motive of such
a jest ?" cried Sse Yeoupe, still surprised, but not
less satisfied.
The motive was," replied Tchangfanjou, " that
the governor, wishing that you should marry his
daughter, and knowing that you were enamoured
of Miss Pe, had given me the humiliating mission
220
JU-KIAO-LI:
to tell you that falsehood, and put an end to your
hopes with regard to her."
On hearing this account, which confirmed the truth
of what he had before heard, Sse Yeoupe's joy was
complete : giving way to it, he burst into a fit of
laughter, and said-" Well, my dear sir, since such
is the case, you have indeed to reproach your-
self with a fault, and I have real cause for satis-
faction."
" Permit me," said Tchangfanjou, "to become
your go-between let the service I shall render you,
in some degree, efface my fault."
" Already," replied Sse Yeoupe, "my father
and Gou Touian have written upon the subject.
Your intervention, my dear sir, could not fail to
be very useful; but can I allow myself to give you
that trouble ?"
A man of talent, and a perfect beauty, are two
such rare objects in the world, that there will be
some glory in bringing them together : how can
you call it trouble ?"
" Since you allow me to hope for so great a mark
of complaisance from you, I shall to-morrow call
upon you to solicit it," said Sse Yeoupe.
" A word once uttered, four horses cannot hold
it back," said Tchangfanjou. "You agree with
me that I had best set off to-morrow. You are,
my lord, an inmate of the hall of jasper; your
illustrious father and Gou Touian have each writ-
ten. The first word will conclude the affair; you
had need only follow me, and enjoy the happi-
ness of placing the perfumed tapers in the nuptial
chamber."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
221
If you execute what you have the kindness to
promise me, my gratitude shall not be trifling: it
shall be my duty to acknowledge such a service,"
said Sse Yeoupe.
Here the conversation ended. Tchangfanjou took
leave, and went away. Sse Yeoupe remained alone,
occupied with his own thoughts. "Since Miss Pe
exists," thought he, "there are many chances
still that our marriage shall take place. But I
have recently entered into an engagement with
Hoangfou : how can I break off this connexion ?
The lord Hoangfou is a man of noble character,
and full of goodness. He has acted towards me
in the kindest possible manner; can I be ungrateful
to him ? If he had but one wife to offer me,
probably the two affairs might be accomplished to-
gether; but Hoangfou has already two young
girls: what proposition can I make him ? The
predictions of the hermit had at first disposed me
to accept of his offers. His words have hitherto
been verified to the letter : Will it be otherwise
with regard to my marriage? In exhorting me to
accept, did he forsee that my union with Miss Pe
would never take place The lord Hoangfou is an
extremely sincere and frank-hearted man," he
continued. "When we had that conversation to-
gether, he told me, that when the time came for
concluding, we should conform ourselves to circum-
stances. The best thing I can do, is to write him
a letter, under my former name of Lieou, and inform
him in detail of all the circumstances of my situa-
tion, and ask his advice as to what I must do. Who
knows but he may suggest some expedient to me?"
222
JU-KIAO-LI:
Having resolved to act thus, he immediately
wrote the letter. The next morning he went to
see Tchangfanjou, and only said that he had a
friendly service to ask of him, which was, to de-
liver a letter to Hoangfou, an inhabitant of the vil-
lage of Kinchi. Tchangfanjou willingly took charge
of it, and immediately set out. Some time after,
Sse Yeoupe took the road to Kinling, and was
accompanied a part of the way by several magis-
trates of Tchekiang.
The butterfly that wanders about, is always a butter-
fly.
But the bush is not the dead stag, nor the stag a
bush.
He who seeks to foresee what is to happen,
Let him follow gently a single path to the end.
We shall here leave Sse Yeoupe, following the
steps of Tchangfanjou. In the mean time, the two
young ladies, Pe and Lo, had passed all their
days and evenings, since the departure of Pe, in stu-
dying literature and writing verses, which was
their favourite amusement. One day, the porter
brought two letters : one was from Dr Gou, and the
other from the inspector-general Sse. When Pe
was at home, his daughter was in the habit of
opening and reading all letters ; she therefore
unfolded the two that had been brought her, and
read them conjointly with Miss Lo. The letter of
the inspector-general Sse was conceived in the fol-
lowing terms :
" Your old brother Sse Youan has the honour
to offer you his respects, his compliments, and his
wishes.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
223
" Private Communication.
u Since your glorious return, an entire year has
passed away without my having had the ho-
nour of seeing you. I imagine that in the noble
retreat which you inhabit in the midst of the moun-
tains of the east, having nothing to occupy you
but wine and poetry, you are surrounded by all
sorts of felicities. As for me, even in the midst
of the affairs which the service of the state im-
poses on me, I have always present to my thought
your example, which is to me a source of unutter-
able confusion.
"My nephew Yeoupe, first inscribed amongst the
candidates of your country, from whom 1 had
been hitherto separated, presented himself to me
last year, when I was complaining of having no
children. I have kept him, and adopted him for
my son. Chance has constantly favoured him, and
he has been recently appointed judge in the pro-
vince of Tchekiang; but though he has attained
the age of manhood, he is not yet married.
"The young lady your daughter, in the profound
retreat in which she lives, is far above all the qua-
lities which form the union of teals. My son has
disclosed to me the sentiments he feels towards
her, and the desire that he has to obtain her in mar-
riage. I do not suppose that the particular senti-
ments which a young man and a maiden may feel
for each other, are capable of influencing a man like
you. However, if you do not disdain a poor and ob-
scure family, andif you grant them access to the eas-
tern wall of your house, our gratitude shall be really
without limits; if, on the contrary, you feel any re-
pugnance to witness the intertwining of the ivy and
224
JU-KIAO-LI:
the dodder, and if you are unwillingly to lend
them the support of a strong tree, I shall receive
your answer without bitterness of heart, and shall
in no degree permit myself to follow the traces of a
certain personage who has preceded us, and who
has become a subject of raillery to our friends. I
put my confidence in this sheet of mulberry * , and
shall await the orders it will please you to trans-
mit me."
The perusal of this letter made joy sparkle in
the eyes of the two cousins. Having then un-
folded that of Gou Touian, they found what
follows:-
"Your relation Gou Kouei salutes you with
respect. Obliged, last year, to set out precipi-
tately for court, I had, through mistake, solicited
from you, in favour of an intriguing knave, the
support that the tree gives to the plant. He got
from me, by stratagem, the letter with which I
troubled your lordship ; but the artifices even of the
demons of the mountains could not deceive so
enlightened an understanding as yours. However,
the fault which my carelessness made me commit,
admits of no excuse. On going this spring to take
the orders of the emperor, I met our brother, Mr
Sse, from whom I learned, not without astonish-
ment, the circumstance, and consequently the
knowledge of my own error. Mr Sse had already
fought with honour in the palace of the south t,
and had obtained an appointment in Tchekiang.
Having turned his thoughts towards the intertwin-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
225
ing of the ivy and the dodder, he addressed himself
to me, to prepare the path for him; taking advan-
tage of a journey which his functions oblige him
to make, he intends ascending to the sacred moun-
tain which you inhabit. You will perceive, by the
first glance that you cast upon him, that he really
has the qualities of jasper. You have hitherto
given yourself much trouble to find out a son-in-
law ; but here, I think, you will have no difficulty
in fixing your choice. I hope in a short time to
find some pretext for returning to the south. I
wish to be present at the joyous banquet, and to
join in the felicitations that will be addressed to
you. If before then you have anything to com-
mand me, favour me with an answer, &c."
The satisfaction of the two cousins was redou-
bled, when they had read/this letter. Miss Lo imme-
diately rose up, and paying her compliments to
Miss Pe, said to her : " Health and joy, sister!"
Miss Pe hastened to reply to this compliment.
" You have a share in it, sister, as well as 1,"
she said ; "and I am not the only one to be'feli-
citated."
"Sister," replied Miss Lo, "you have for you
the commands of his father the inspector-general,
the interest which Dr Gou takes in it, and the so-
licitations which he has undertaken to make. On
the return of my uncle, he will accede to the pro-
posal at the first word. As for me, I have, to be
sure, an engagement of the heart, but I have not
yet any go-between ; and even should young Sse
be faithful, and return to keep his promise, he
does not know that I am in this house. If, on re-
ceipt of my letter, he should come to seek me
226
JU-KIAO-LI:
here, will my uncle, who has so strong an affec-
tion for you, consent, through love for me, to put
two spoons into one cup? When I think of
all this, I find that my fate is far from being cer-
tain."
" Your reflections would be very just, sister,
" if they were applied to what usually takes place
in the world ; but my father is not at all like other
men. Since he has an affection for me, he must also
love you, sister : besides, he has accepted the com-
mission from my aunt, and certainly he will not esta-
blish any difference between us by making me a
jealous and selfish woman."
" So much the better," replied Miss Lo; but
there are still many difficulties in the way. The
moment after a man has given him his daughter,
to ask him for his niece is what young Sse would
find it very difficult to do while, on the other
hand, my uncle could never suppose that he would
afflict us by choosing one husband for his daughter,
and another for his niece. My establishment de-
pends entirely on the will of my mother, and that
of my uncle: what resistance could I oppose to
them?"
" Do not make yourself uneasy, sister," replied
Miss Pe. "If any difficulty should occur, it be-
longs to me to declare the truth. Should your
marriage not be concluded, I shall remain faithful
to my engagements with you, and I shall not
marry either."
"If it is thus, the protection that you afford me
will excite my deepest gratitude," said Miss Lo.
"In Dr Gou's letter," continued she, " it is said
that young Sse will take advantage of the journey
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
227
which his functions oblige him to make, to come to
the sacred mountain. So that young Sse must
have arrived here about the same time as the
letter. If he should have come, how are we to
know it ? It would be an excellent thing to let him
know that I am here."
" You are right," said Miss Pe; and she sent a
person to the porter, to ask if the lord Sse had
come to pay a visit. The porter replied-" The
lord Sse sent a messenger here to announce his
visit and I answered that my master was not at
home, and that there was no one here to receive
him that as he wished to pay his visit, it would
be sufficient if he sent his card to be deposited in
the registry of the gate, without taking the trouble
to come so far himself. His servant went away,
and I know not if he will come back."
" If that answer was given him," said Miss Pe,
" young Sse will not return."
"
I suppose so," said Miss Lo. " And even
should he come, we should have some difficulty in
conveying him intelligence."
" Where would be the difficulty of conveying in-
telligence to him ?" said Miss Pe, laughing. It
would only be necessary for you, my dear sister, to
put on male attire, and go and meet him as you
did before."
Miss Lo could not help laughing in her turn at
this jest.
How agitated are the hearts of the beautiful inmates of
the inner apartment
What numberless fears spring up in their tender bosoma!
Sorrow and joy succeed each other in their souls;
228
JUKIAO-LI:
They abandon themselves to the cares which occupy
their hearts.
The two cousins were now however better sa-
tisfied than before: in the next chapter will be
found the remainder of their adventures.
CHAPTER XIX.
MISTAKE UPON MISTAKE, CROSSES ON ALL SIDES.
" How comes it that fate so often deceives our hopes? Most human
affairs are thus conducted in an irregular manner. On opening my eyes,
1 see very well that he is not me. But on starting from sleep, the
question is often asked ; who am I, myself? At every moment we are
abused by a thousand deceitful appearances. It is not given to us to
discern the truth. The destiny of marriage must have been previously
fixed; and yet in the midst of so many cross purposes we at length
become bewildered."
WHILST the two cousins thus passed their time con-
versing together in their apartment, it was one day
suddenly announced to them, that the lord Pe had
arrived. Mrs Lo and the two young ladies went to re-
ceive him ; and soon after, Pe entered, his counte-
nance wearing a smile of satisfaction. After sa-
luting Mrs Lo, he said-" Health and joy, my dear
sister! I have at length found the son-in-law I have
been looking for. The marriages of my niece and
of Houngiu are now certain."
Mrs Lo was delighted to hear this intelligence,
and said-" Ah, brother, if it be so, what thanks
do I not owe you for so great a mark of good-
ness!"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
229
After Mrs Lo's salutation, the two young ladies
came forward together to pay their devoirs to Pe,
who said to them, laughing You are two sisters,
whose talents and beauty are perfectly equal ;
and I have been unwilling that you should be sepa-
rated."
This declaration persuaded the two cousins, that
he alluded to Sse Yeoupe, whom he had no doubt
met at Hangtcheou, and who had made proposals
of marriage for them. They therefore rejoiced in
their hearts, and desisted from asking any ques-
tions. Young Lo came in his turn to salute his
uncle. The baggage was looked over, and a ban-
quet prepared to celebrate Pe's return. The latter,
having changed his clothes, went to repose himself
during a part of the day; afterwards, they came
and took their places; and all being seated, Mrs
Lo commenced the conversation. "You have been
from home a long time," said she. " You were
to have gone only to the borders of the lake, but
you have, no doubt, extended your excursion fur-
ther?"
"I went to Hangtcheou, and as I feared that
the governor Yang might suppose that I came to
return his visit, I changed my name, and passed
under that of Hoangfou, a private individual.
During my stay on the borders of the lake, I
saw a considerable number of young men, but not
one man of real merit." He then gave them a de-
tailed account of all that happened to him, when he
composed some verses in the gallery of the cold
spring, as also the false reputation which Tchaot-
sianli and Tcheouchingwang had acquired, and how
he had discovered their vain boasting.
230
JUKIAO-LI:
This account very much amused the two cou-
sins, who could not refrain from laughing. "And
what took place afterwards ?" again asked Mrs
Lo.
"I had made rather a long stay on the bor-
ders of the lake, sometimes directing my walks to
one side, then to another. Seeing, at length, that
there were as few men of talent there as here, I
crossed the river Tsiantang, and went towards
Chanyin, to see the curiosities of the grotto of the
emperor Ju. There I met a young man of the
name of Lieou, who is also a native of Kinling:
in point of appearance and good manners he is
really an accomplished model. We lodged toge-
ther in the monastery of Ju. Morning and evening
we conversed upon literature, or wrote poetry toge-
ther : we discussed ancient and modern subjects.
In this manner we passed our time for fifteen days.
Judging from his mind, his noble appearance, his
vast acquirements, and his eminent talents, he ap-
pears to me destined one day to take his flight to
the gardens of the academy. Many men have
passed before my eyes, but I have never before
seen one who united so many qualities. I wished
to marry him to Houngiu, but I feared that my
niece might accuse me of undue preference; and if
I had given him to my niece, I should have to
dread that Houngiu would complain that I neg-
lected her interests ; for, with the exception of
young Lieou, I believe it would be very difficult to
find a man worthy of her. I recollected that
Ohoang and Niuying had both consecrated them-
selves to Chun. Several persons have since imi-
tated that ancient example. I saw, besides, that
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
231
they were not only friends, but united by the ten-
derest affection, and that it would grieve me to se-
parate them; in fine, of my own accord, and with
my own mouth, I promised him that he should
have both. It has been to me a subject of extreme
satisfaction to have accomplished the business :
what do you think of it, sister?
On hearing these words the two cousins remained
stupified, looking at each other without being able
to utter a word. " Brother," replied Mrs Lo,
"your idea has been an excellent one. I had in
fact myself thought that Mengli was too young to
preside at the gathering of the marsile and the
nuptial alisma but now that she will have my
niece for a companion and support, my mind is
perfectly tranquil; besides, since this young Lieou
has so much merit and so many accomplishments,
the happiness of her life is assured. Your brother-
in-law inhabits the land of the nine fountains, and
like him I may now close my eyes."
Pe seemed to be in the greatest joy. " You have
exactly expressed what I had in my thoughts,"
cried he. " I who have no son, have only my
daughter Houngiu to think of but now that I have
found a son-in-law in the person of Lieou, all my
wishes are accomplished. Let my coffin be closed
to-morrow; I shall enter it joyously and without
repining."
Though speaking in this manner, Pe laughed
with pleasure, and Mrs Lo imperceptibly joined in
his satisfaction. It was only the two young ladies
who, seeing a tacit consent thus wrung from them,
felt to the bottom of their hearts the most unutterable
trouble. They dared not however open their lips,
232
JU-KIAO-LI:
or make the least allusion to Sse Yeoupe. At
length Miss Pe turned her eyes upon Yansou ; ;
Yansou understood the look, and immediately
brought to Pe the two letters of the inspector-gene-
ral Sse and Dr Gou. After having read them, Pe,
very much surprised, exclaimed, " How is this ? He
who obtained the second place at the examination
of the north, is Sse Yeoupe; and he is the nephew
of Sse Fanghoei, who has adopted him for his son !
That was the reason that he set himself down
amongst the candidates of Honan. If I had known
all that a little earlier, the marriage would have
been soon concluded. Why has he delayed so long
making me the proposal ? Now I have myself entered
into an engagement with young Lieou, and Sse
Yeoupe consequently comes too late. How can I
remedy this ?"
He cast his eyes upon his daughter, and observed
that she held down her head and remained silent.
He then made a reflection. " Every one talks of
the merit and accomplishments of Sse Yeoupe,"
said he : " he has obtained the second place at the
examination. I am very well inclined to think that
he cannot be an ordinary man; but alas ! I have
not as yet seen him. The number of men possessed
of real merit is not great," continued he; those
who have talent, have not always an agreeable
person and those who are well-looking, often
lack talents ; but perfection is to be found only in
the man whose appearance and talents are equally
unexceptionable. Sse Yeoupe may be a man of a
vulgar exterior, whose sole recommendation is
his merit, or he may be incapable of conducting
himself prudently. Under every point of view he
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
233
cannot be so perfect a man as I desire while, on
the other hand, I know the figure and talents of
young Lieou; and not to say any more of him, he
appears to have a character full of moderation and
sweetness; his language is modest, and his reflec-
tions always judicious. He is a man who has raised
himself to the perfection of jasper. As to the repu-
tation that he may acquire, I have no doubt but it
will one day lead him to the steed of gold, and
open to him the hall of jasper. Young Sse is
assuredly also a man of merit; but I do not see in
what he can be superior to young Lieou. Now I
have already an engagement with the latter, while
with the former we have got no further than the
proposal. What is to be done in this case ? What
plan can I adopt?'
"Brother," said Mrs Lo, " you are yourself ac-
quainted with the excellent qualities of young Lieou,
and they have met your approbation ; there is
therefore no reason to change your resolution. You
cannot think of breaking off such an engagement,
when the girl is already promised ? Young Sse may
have merit, but of what consequence is that now ?
All that can be done is to send him a refusal."
" Yes, certainly that is the only measure to be
adopted," replied Pe. "Truly, this young Sse has
been badly treated by destiny. In the commencement
Gou Touian had made choice of him for my son-in-
law, but he himself refused. He came afterwards,
and left at my house some verses that he had written
upon the vernal willows; in this he become the
dupe of a knavish stratagem. I succeeded in un-
ravelling that affair, and had inquiries made after
him in every direction, without being able to discover
234
JU-KIAO-LI:
him. He now reappears ; and when the letter con-
taining his proposal arrives, I am already under
engagements to another. So many cross purposes
shew that he has no share in the destinies of mar-
riage, since nothing turns out according to his
wishes."
The family continued thus conversing some time
longer before they separated. As soon as all had
retired, Miss Lo hastened to glide secretly into Miss
Pe's chamber. "Sister," said she, " at first we had
only Sse ; now we have got also young Lieou. In
what way shall we arrange this matter?"
Miss Pe heaved a sigh. " There is an old pro-
verb," said she, " which says, that for eight or nine
things that go contrary to our desires, there are
but two or three that succeed. You and I may
apply this to ourselves. How many obstacles and
cross purposes has not this projected marriage with
young Sse met with ! It might be said that my
father is even at present inclined towards it. He
had attained the object of his hopes : the letters
of the inspector-general Sse and Dr Gou had arrived,
containing the proposal, and to all appearance there
could be no doubt of its success ; my father had
been for several years looking for a husband for
me, without being able to find one of whom he
could approve :-who could have ever foreseen
that in the space of a few instants he would have
discovered this young Lieou? Thus all the trouble
that has been taken during so great a length of time,
is carried away one morning by the current of the
water. How is it possible to support such a thought?"
" Sister," replied Miss Lo," whatever attach-
ment you and young Sse may have for each other,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
235
it is at best only a secret inclination ; you have
never seen each other, even in profile. The engage-
ment as far as it concerns you may be fulfilled;
but I, who when conversing with him placed my
hands in his, who, seated by his side, touched his
shoulder with mine, who have given him assurances,
and pronounced oaths, which I repeated two or
three times ;-that I who have done all this should
be thus one morning consecrated to another man,
that I should be wanting in constancy to the first
and fidelity to the second, is an event absolutely
impossible."
" Though I have never been in the presence of
young Sse," replied Miss Pe, " the engagement of
the heart does not the less exist; besides, he had
performed the condition of writing the verses upon
the vernal willows. The pieces of poetry which I
asked him to compose upon the departure of th
crane and the arrival of the swallow, had a meaning
and a motive I cannot therefore look upon him
with indifference. But in such delicate matters
girls like us, inmates of the inner apartment, find it
very difficult to speak their minds."
'I conceive, sister, that in the first moment you
should have some difficulty in declaring openly
what concerned yourself; but I do not see any
obstacle to your telling what regards me. My
uncle's intention is to secure our happiness, and not
to oppose himself without a motive to what we de-
sire. If he was made acquainted with the irregular
proceeding in which I engaged myself, he would
probably adopt another line of conduct."
" I shall certainly not fail to speak," said Miss
236
JU-KIAO-LI:
Pe; but it is better to wait a little while. I heard
yesterday that my uncle Gou had set out on his
return home he will certainly come to see us in
a few days. When here, I shall seek for an oppor-
tunity to explain everything to him and as he is
the go-between chosen by young Sse, he will no
doubt leave nothing undone."
" This appears to me a very good idea," said
Miss Lo.
This affair became the constant subject of their
deliberations at all hours and all moments.
It is of themselves these fair ones, whose minds are so
agitated, are thinking.
The support of a father and an aunt is however not
wanting to them
They had found a peach-tree which heaven had adorned
with the most brilliant tints,
But too thick a foliage has come and concealed it from
their fond regards.
Two or three days after, Dr Gou, who had heard
of Pe's return, came eagerly to see him. The
brothers-in-law, who had been separated for more
than a year, felt the most extreme joy at seeing
each other. Pe detained the doctor and put him
to lodge in the pavilion of rural dreams and a
short time after, Miss Pe came forth to pay her
duty to her uncle. The doctor took advantage of
the occasion to speak to Pe. "Well, brother, you
have at length found the accomplished son-in-law
you have been seeking for, and all the pains and
trouble you have given yourself during so long a
time have not been in vain ! You have discovered
a man not unworthy of the talents and charms of
my niece. This is a subject of great joy, and I
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
237
ought to congratulate you. But tell me, I pray
you, has Sse Liansian already sent the nuptial
presents?"
"Brother," replied Pe, " I am infinitely sensible
to these proofs of your affection, but alas ! this affair
cannot be arranged."
"Here is something new! And why not ?" ex-
claimed Dr Gou in the greatest astonishment.
'For no other reason," replied Pe, " but that
your letter, brother, and that of the lord Sse, arrived
too late; I had already concluded with another
person."
"My letter must have arrived a long time back,"
said the doctor : "how could it have come too late ?''
"Since my malady, finding the time hang heavy
on me at home," replied Pe, " I went in the begin-
ning of spring ,on an excursion to the beautiful
scenery in the province of Tchekiang. I met by
chance at Chanyin a young poet, to whom I pro-
mised Houngiu and Lo Mengli in marriage. It was
on my return here a few daysago that I found the two
letters, which you perceive have come too late."
"I suppose that this young man is a native of
Chanyin. What is his name?" asked Dr Gou."
His family name is Lieou; and, what is better,
he is from Kinling."
What kind of a person was he, and how did he
so promptly obtain your consent, brother?" said the
doctor.
" In appearance that Pangan of whom the an-
cients boast so much, did not perhaps equal him
and with regard to talent, it may be said that he is
superior to Fangtseukian. How could I have re-
fused my consent to such a man?
238
JU-KIAO-LI:
" Brother," inquired the doctor, " did you ask
him if he resided in Kinling, or in the environs ?""
" He told me that he lived in the city, and added
that he had had the honour to pass under your eyes
at the examinations."
"This is still more extraordinary. Had he been
from Chanyin, I should have nothing to say; there
may be other men of merit besides those I have
seen. If he said that he was from the environs of
Kinling, though I cannot know every one there,
yet I ought to have heard speak of him. However,
there may even be talents there that have escaped
my observation. But if he says that he inhabits the
city itself, and that I know him, not only there is
not amongst my friends any person calling himself
Lieou, but I have never seen a clever man of that
name amongst those who were assembled at the
examinations. May it not be, brother, that you have
again become the dupe of some adventurer ?"
" If I had had but a single interview with him,
and had seen him only for a few moments," replied
Pe, "I might not have been able to examine him
sufficiently but he and I lodged together in the
same monastery; we were continually together
from morning till night. For more than fifteen days
we constantly passed our time together, looking at
beautiful flowers, giving each other subjects for
composition, drinking as we talked of literature,
and reasoned now upon the events of remote anti-
quity, and then upon things of recent occurrence.
His amiability never failed him for a single moment
it is certainly of a nature to seduce any one. This
was what rendered me so eager to accept him for a
son-in-law. Should I have foolishly been led away
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
239
by such an idea, if I entertained the least well-
founded doubt?"
" Since you have observed him so minutely,
brother," said the doctor, " it is clear that you could
not have been mistaken; but I regret very much
that you have not seen Sse Liansian. Had you
seen him, the inferiority of young Lieou would have
soon made itself apparent."
" You think so," replied Pe, laughing, " because
you have not seen young Lieou. Had you seen him,
you certainly would not speak thus."
" Without meaning to disparage your young
Lieou," replied the doctor, also laughing," he is
after all nothing more than a poor bachelor."
" I merely said that he had sufficient talents and
accomplishments to distinguish him from the crowd,"
replied Pe. But when the time comes for pro-
motion and reputation, he will certainly not be found
an ordinary man at the examinations. I am per-
suaded that his name will be one day heard in the
gardens of the academy. He is not unworthy of
you, brother."
"
I do not set an excessive value upon the
honours even of the academy," replied the doctor;
but you, brother, turn away your view from Sse
Yeoupe who is already nominated academician, and
fix it exclusively upon him who does not yet belong
to the academy. It appears to me that there is an
excessive partiality in this conduct."
Brother," said Pe, " you announced to me in
your letter, that Sse Yeoupe had been appointed
judge in Tchekiang. Why do you now speak of
the academy?
" Sse Yeoupe," replied the doctor, " had ob-
240
JU-KIAO-LI
tained the first place at the second examination.
According to the regulations he should have had one
of the posts appertaining to the court; but through
animosity towards him who had presided at the
examinations, Messieurs Tchang and Wang had
contrived that he should be given merely a place in
the magistracy. Our college, however, not wishing
to suffer such an infraction of the law, declared
the intention of publicly denouncing the fact. The
household minister, alarmed, acknowledged himself
the injustice he had committed, and by virtue of
an imperial decree he re-established things as
they should have been. I suppose that, on receiving
this intelligence, Sse Yeoupe will have quitted his
place, and in a few days will return here."
In a few days also, according to the engagement
we entered into, young Lieou will come here to see
me," said Pe. " When all the parties shall be
assembled, the waters of King will be easily distin-
guished from those of Wei."
"All in good time," said the doctor.
Miss Pe listened to this discussion, but did not
think it right to take a share in it. She went
secretly to confer with Miss Lo. Neither of the
suitors had as yet sent any presents; and it was
necessary to wait, before taking a resolution, until
one of them should observe this formality.
Pe and the doctor had now been several days
together, when the porter came to announce that
the young lord Tchang, who previously, under the
title of guest, had lodged in the house, wished to
be received. Pe, moved by his recollections, ex-
claimed, " What does he want here again?"
" He has certainly some motive for coming,"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
241
said the doctor, "what inconvenience can it be to
you to receive him ?"
Pe told the porter to invite him into the saloon ;
and in a few moments Tchangfanjou entered and
made his obeisance. After the usual compliments,
they took their seats; and Pe, opening the con-
versation, said, " It is a long time since we have
had the honour of seeing you."
"
Since the last autumn examination," replied
Tchangfanjou, I have been to the college of the
province of Tchekiang. This it was that hindered
me from coming to pay you my respects."
" Is it long since you returned?" asked Pe.
" I arrived yesterday, and on an affair which I
have to communicate to you," replied Tchangfanjou.
" What is the affair upon which you deign to
give me your instructions ?" asked Pe.
I have a very intimate friend who is now well
known. A long time back the reputation of the
virtues of your excellency's daughter reached him,
and he knows that she possesses all the quali-
ties which conduce to a perfect union He has
therefore put into my hands the handle of the
hatchet, and has charged me to come and ask your
excellency's consent to the fortunate ties he wishes
to contract."
What is the name of your friend ?" demanded Pe,
" Sse Yeoupe, the new doctor of the grand
college."
242
JU-KIAO-LI:
" Ab, it is really Mr Sse ! My relation arrived
here a few days ago to speak to me in his favour,
and that is precisely the cause of the embarrassment
in which I am at this moment."
"Is the lord Gou, your relation, here at present?"
asked Tchangfanjou. "Well! Mr Sae has proved
himself a scholar from his earliest years, and the
young lady your daughter is a celebrated beauty,
the ornament of the inner apartment. Heaven has
designed them for each other : how can you be
embarrassed upon this subject ?"
"The cause of my embarrassment is, that I have
already promised her to another," replied Pe.
" When Mr Sse had obtained the first place at the
examination for bachelors, your excellency was
kind enough to give him some hopes. How comes
it, now that he has mounted the steed of gold, and
penetrated into the hall of jasper, that you seem
disposed to reject him ? This is a circumstance
that requires explanation."
" Sir," said Pe, " do not ask me any more
questions at present; but return, if you please,
when I shall have consulted my relation upon this
subject."
"It is so excellent a connexion," said Tchang-
fanjou, " that I trust your excellency will be en-
abled to agree to it."
Pe kept Tchangfanjou to take tea, during which
the conversation continued. " This village is in-
habited by a great number of persons," remarked
Tchangfanjou. " Are all the houses close to each
other in this spot, or are there some apart and at a
distance ?"
" The greater number are close to each other
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
243
here," replied Pe: " there are few isolated houses.
What motive have you for asking the question?"
" One of my friends," said Tchangfanjou, 'has
given me a letter. I have sent to inquire at both
sides of the village, but the person to whom the
letter is addressed cannot be found."
68 Who is the person you seek, sir ?" asked Pe.
"
He is a private person named Hoangfou,"
replied Tchangfanjou.
Pe anxiously said-" Hoangfou is one of my
relations; if you have a letter for him, you have only
to give it to me, and I shall deliver it to him."
" Ah, he is one of your relations ! I asked for
him everywhere," said Tchangfanjou. He then
sent one of his servants to get the letter, and bring
it to him. Pe received it, and after casting a glance
at it, put it into his sleeve. The conversation was
kept up some time longer, until Tchangfanjou took
his leave and went away. Pe returned to the pavilion
of rural dreams, to rejoin Dr Gou. This visit of
Tchangfanjou," said he, " is also relative to Mr Sse's
proposal."
Did he tell you when Sse Liansian would
arrive asked the doctor.
"I did not inquire," replied Pe. "But he has
also brought me a letter from young Lieou;" and
he drew the letter from his sleeve, opened it, and
began to read it with the doctor. The following
were the contents:-
" Young Lieou Hiochi has the honour to offer
you his homage, his wishes, and his compliments."
" Private Observations.
" I, who am but a poor scholar without instruc-
tion, have had the happiness, without hoping it,
244
JU-KIAO-LR
to perceive in the midst of the waters and the moun-
tains the purple flame which announces the presence
of the immortals. Since I received the orders you
were pleased to give me, I have suffered much by
being deprived, during the space of a lunar revolu-
tion, of your presence, and of those paternal examples
that you afforded me. They are all still enclosed in
my breast. You not only shewed me no disdain,
but even you conferred on me the honour of the
most brilliant alliance. This may be called one of
those celestial blessings which leave not in the
heart of man sufficient place for gratitude. But I
told you, when we were together, that I had already
formed engagements with two families; that one of
them had seen its lute broken, and that the other
younglady, flying from persecution, had disappeared,
and had not left the slightest trace. You did me
the honour to persist in your offer, saying, that all
was over with regard to the young girl that was no
more; and that as to her who was still in existence,
fitting arrangements should be made in case of her
reappearing. Now, contrary to my expectation, on
arriving at Hangtcheou, I found that there was
still no account of her who was living; and that she
who was supposed to be dead, was still alive. It
was a false report of the person who came to me
with the news. The father of the young girl whom
1 wish to marry, is a man of the highest rank; a
great magistrate has charged himself with the part
of go-between; and I now find myself in a defile
where it is equally difficult for me to retreat as to
advance, and out of which I know not how to get.
All that I can do is to lay the circumstances frankly
before you. Your lordship is full of reason, justice,
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
245
and delicacy. You are a mirror in which man's
duties may be seen reflected. You will in some
manner or other succeed in arranging all this. I
take the opportunity of this letter to announce to
you, that in a few days I shall await the commands
of your lordship at the foot of your staircase, in
order to learn what fate may have decided.
Confidential Communication.
Hiochi again reiterates to you his respectful
homage."
Pe was very much surprised by the perusal of
this letter. "This is also a singular adventure !"
cried he. " Were there ever in any affair so many
turns and cross purposes ?"
" Since he excuses himself on account of another
engagement, you ought, brother, to seize the occa-
sion and reply to him, and thus enable yourself to
conclude the marriage with Sse Yeoupe. There
would be an advantage on both sides."
I do not deny that your plan is a good one.
But young Lieou has so many fine qualities, that I
cannot yet resign the hope of having him for a son-
in-law. Let us wait till he comes here, brother,
and then we shall terminate this affair."
Be it so," said the doctor.
It was thought that no further change could take place,
And yet here are all of a sudden new engagements;
But were it not for these crosses to which we are
constantly exposed,
How could our sentiments make themselves known
We shall for some time leave Pe awaiting the
return of young Lieou, and occupy ourselves with
Lo Mengli. When she had resolved to go from
246
JU-KIAO-LI:
Chantoung to Kiangnan, to avoid the persecution
which menaced her, she feared that Sse Yeoupe
might in vain seek her on his return; and she there-
fore wrote him a letter, which she intrusted to an
old servant named Wangcheou. She gave this man
the money necessary for his journey, and ordered
him to go to the capital, and deliver the letter to
the lord Sse; if he was not at court, Wangcheou
was to make inquiries after him on the road till he
arrived at Kinling, and afterwards bring her the
answer to the house of the lord her uncle Pe. She
recommended him above all things to keep the
letter safe, not to give it into any hands but those
of Sse Yeoupe, and to be very careful not to take
another person for him. Wangcheou set out, after
having promised to execute this commission.
Now this Wangcheou was a very simple man.
When he arrived in the capital, Sse Yeoupe had
already quitted it, so that he immediately set off
again to follow him. But being ignorant that Sse
Yeoupe had obtained the degree of doctor, and that
he had been appointed a magistrate, he asked upon
the road only for young Mr Sse Yeoupe, in conse-
quence of which no one knew of whom be was
speaking. He followed him thus to Kinling, and
there continued to ask after him in every direction.
In the affairs of this world there are sometimes
singular coincidences : it so happened that Sse
Yeoute was in the town at that time. Since his
disagreeable adventure in the house of the lord Pe,
Sse Yeoute felt greatly mortified. When he after-
wards heard of Sse Yeoupe's double success, he
could not help regretting what he had done. " It
was assuredly a friendly act," said he, " to offer
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
247
him twenty-four ounces of silver, and the baggage
he stood in want of; but nevertheless, after the
trick I played him, it would not be agreeable for
me to meet him." He was, as it has been said, in
town the day that Wangcheou, deceived by the
similarity of the names of Sse Yeoupe and Sse
Yeoute, came to make inquiries in the house where
he lodged. The servant, addressing the porter,
said-" Is it not here that young Mr Sae Yeoupe
lives?"
"It's here," replied the porter, who had not
heard very distinctly. " This is the house of
young Mr Sse Yeoute. Where do you come from ?"
" Young Mr Lo, of the province of Chantoung,
has sent me to deliver him this letter," replied
Wangcheou.
The porter went to inform his master, who said,
" do not know Mr Lo of Chantoung: there must be
some mistake;" and he went out to see what it was.
The moment Wangcheou saw him approach, he
hastened to address him, saying-" I have been
by my master's orders to look for you in the capital,
Mr Sse ; but unfortunately you had already left it.
I have inquired after you all along the road, and in
every direction: and during all this time you were
here."
Sse Yeoute began to suspect that Sse Yeoupe
was the person he was looking for; but not to let
this be perceived, he answered vaguely-" What a
deal of trouble I have given you! Where is your
master's letter ?"
"My master," replied Wangcheou, " has had
some business that required him to quit the pro-
vince of Chantoung, and go into Kianguan and as
248
JU-KIAO-L1:
he feared that he should not see you on your return
from the capital, he charged me to go in search of
you, and give you this letter." And, as he said this,
he took from his breast the letter, which he pre-
sented to Sse Yeoute with both his hands. Sse
Yeoute, on taking it, said-" Go and sit outside
there, while I look at the contents of this letter."
And he ordered his servant to prepare something
for the messenger to eat.
After Wangcheou had gone out, Sse Yeoute ran
to his library; and looking at the letter, he saw at
top and bottom two flourishes, and the impression
of two little seals. It was very neatly folded, and
carefully closed. On the middle was written, in
seven large characters-To be opened by the lord
Sse with his own hands; and underneath, in four
little characters, whose noble surname is Yeoupe.
The writing was regular and very elegant. Sse
Yeoute thought there was something very particular
in the manner in which this letter was addressed.
"Must there not be some reason for all this ?" he
asked himself: he then stole a look into the inside
of the letter, and raising cautiously the folds of the
paper, he opened so much of it that he was enabled
to read the writing. He saw one side entirely covered
with small regular characters like flies' heads, and
he read what follows:-
" Your friend and younger brother Lo Mengli
has the honour to salute you. He addresses this
letter to his brother Liansian, to you with whom
chance brought him acquainted during your voyage.
This interview was like a blessing sent from heaven,
but the sad separation that followed it has filled
my heart with extreme bitterness. I recollect the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
249
solemn oaths which were pronounced upon the
stone, and the secret engagements contracted in
presence of the flowers are still sounding in my
ears. And yet, alas! the body is in the east, whilst
the shadow is in the west. How difficult it is to
reunite them! Every time these thoughts present
themselves to my mind, it appears to me as if I
were pursued by a dream. But the event upon
which the happiness of one's life is placed, cannot
be considered a dream. I heard of the success
that attended you last autumn at the examination
of the north, and was greatly consoled. No doubt
the flowers of the literary gardens await you next
spring. I should have wished much to have seen
you on your return, and offered you my congratu-
dations at your half-way home. Unfortunately,
some unforeseen difficulties into which my family
has fallen, obliged me to go for some time to the
house of my uncle in the province of Kiangnan : my
former residence will be entirely shut up. I dreaded
that, if you should come to inquire for me, you
might have conceived suspicions capable of troubling
the fountain of the peach-tree. For this reason
I have sent to you this old servant, who is charged
to inform you of these circumstances. If you still
attach any value to my friendship, and wish for a
marriage with my sister, come and inquire for me
in the village of Kinchi, at the house of Pe Thai-
hiouan, counsellor to the department of public
works. It is there that you will hear of me. These
lines at a thousand miles distance, have for object
to solicit remembrance.-Private Communication."
"How!" said See Yeoute, on finishing the letter,
250
JU-KIAO-LI:
"this is another marriage that Sse Yeoupe is gone
to contract with the Lo family in Chantoung. If
I could again present myself under his name !
But it is precisely to Pe's house that he is told
to go for news of his fair one; and it is in that
very house that I have already once shewn the
horse's hoof; how can I ever present myself there
again have heard," continued he to himself, that
after having been first appointed judge at Hang-
tcheou, he afterwards entered the grand academical
college. He must now be on his way home. It
is better to preserve this letter for him, and by a
shew of affection endeavour to obliterate my former
conduct towards him. He is now an academician,
and hereafter I may have need of him."
He determined to follow this idea; and when
Wangcheou had finished dining, he had him called
in, and said to him, ' Return to your master, make
my compliments to him, and tell him that I already
knew all that he told me in his letter that I will
follow exactly his orders ; and that, for fear of
some mistake, I do not send him a written an-
swer."
He then took one ounce of silver, and gave it to
Wangcheou, saying to him-" have made you
take a long journey, and given you a great deal of
trouble."
"I have still all the money my master gave
me for the journey; how can I think of accepting
more from you, Mr Sse?" said Wangcheou.
" It is but a trifle, only something to purchase
wine," replied Sse Yeoute.
Wangcheou thanked him, took his leave, went
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
251
away, and proceeded to Kinchi with the answer to
Miss Lo.
Sse Yeoute, having now the letter in his posses-
sion, returned to his country house, and told his
servants to be on the look-out for the lord Sse, as
in going to Kinchi he must pass by the house, and
he was desirous of having him stop for some time
with him. In pursuance of these orders, the ser-
vants were on the alert. At the end of a few days
they learned that Sse Yeoupe had arrived at Kin-
ling, and that he intended to go to the village of
Kinchi the next morning. Immediately Sse Yeoute
had a banquet prepared ; and at nine o'clock the
following morning his servants came to inform
him that the lord Sse was approaching. Sse
Yeoute went out himself, and ran to the entrance
of the place, to be there before he came up. A
short time after, the sedan chair of Sse Yeoupe
was seen. Sse Yeoute gave one of his servants a
visiting card, and told him to run up to the sedan
chair, and announce that his master was on the
road and requested an interview. When he saw
Sse Yeoute's name, Sse Yeoupe ordered his bearers
to stop. As soon as Sse Yeoute saw him stop, he
hurried forward, and made an obeisance before the
sedan-chair. Sse Yeoupe immediately descended,
to return his politeness. "I was just going to call
upon you," said he: " why should you take the trou-
ble to come so far to meet me ?"
" I feared," said Sse Yeoute, " that a man of dis-
tinction like you, my lord, might have disdained
a poor and obscure individual, and I came forward
to present you my invitation."
252
JU-KIAO-LI:
In speaking thus, the two young men walked to
Sse Yeoute's house. Sse Yeoupe ordered one of
his suite to take a card of ceremony, and bring it
into the saloon. The courtesies re-commenced ;
and when they were finished, the two friends sat
down.
Sse Yeoupe began the conversation. "The bene-
fit which you formerly conferred on me with so much
kindness," said he, "remains profoundly graven
on my heart; the sacrifice of my person would not
be sufficient to repay it."
" So light a trifle deserves not to be men-
tioned," replied Sse Yeoute. As he said this, din-
ner was brought in.
" I came only to have the honour of seeing you,"
said Sse Yeoupe: " it is not right that I should put
you to all this trouble."
On coming hither from the city, your people
and horses must have got an appetite," said Sse
Yeoupe; "there are but a few coarse viands that
have been got ready; deign to treat me still as a
friend."
"My dear sir," said Sse Yeoupe, "you shew me
an excess of affection; you are continually giving
me proofs of it."
The two friends sat down opposite each other
after having drunk during some time, Sse Yeoute
said-" I imagine, my lord, that the object of your
present journey is your marriage with the daughter
of the lord Pe?"
Yes, it is that for which I am come. But
I am not yet certain what turn the affair will
take."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
253
Sse Yeoute began to laugh. " The fate of this
marriage has been already fixed by an old en-
gagement. Now, my lord, that you have been
promoted to new dignities, the accomplishment
must follow as a matter of course ; all that is to
be regretted is, that the marriage and other affairs
which you have in Chantoung with Lo Mengli, will
be retarded thereby."
Sse Yeoupe was struck with the greatest asto-
nishment. I have never," he said, " men-
tioned a single word about these affairs to any one
living. How have you come to the knowledge of
them?"
Sse Yeoute continued to laugh. "What, my
lord, you will not permit me even to know the
fine things that you propose doing ?"
" Since you know something about them," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe, "you also, no doubt, must have
some information concerning Lo Mengli, which I
hope you will have the kindness to communicate to
me."
" Yes, I have some information;" said Sse
Yeoute laughing " but you shall not learn it so
easily."
"Only tell it to me," said Sse Yeoupe, laugh-
ing also, and you shall be at liberty to fix
your own conditions. I shall not object to your
orders."
" My lord, I shall not take advantage of
your situation; drink only three cups," said Sse
Yeoute.
Sse Yeoupe again laughed. " I cannot bear
much wine," said he; " but I cannot refuse this
254
JU-KIAO-LI
condition. Have the kindness to relieve me from
inquietude ?"
Sse Yeoute ordered his servants to fill three
large cups; and Sse Yeoupe, seeing there was no
remedy, was obliged to drink them, all the while
speaking and laughing. When he had drunk, he
called upon Sse Yeoute to give him some news of
Lo Mengli. But the remainder of this account
requires to be treated separately. In it will be
seen the suitor gifted with real talents pursuing
his path, supported by the solidity of his suc-
cesses; and the beautiful inmates of the inner
pavilion unveiling their impassioned sentiments.
These disasters were not the mistakes of fate,
These cross purposes were the results of misunder-
standing.
Who could have foreseen that from so many mistakes
and disappointments
Would result in the end a fate brilliant as flowers ?
The last chapter will make known if Sse Yeoute
consented, at length, to tell what he knew about Lo
Mengli.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
255
CHAPTER XX.
EMBROIDERIES UPON EMBROIDERIES - GENERAL
SATISFACTION.
"The demons have exhausted their efforts, and accomplished their
task; the mountain has been scaled, and the torrents have been
crossed. Sweetness and bitterness are mingled in the nennphar, and in
its flower. The same fate awaits the root and leaves of the peach-tree.
Genius at length takes its flight upwards like the flame. Love is like
the river which is hurried to the east by an irresistible attraction. A
tender engagement had made probable what has happened. There is
nothing now to obstract the wishes of the lovers."
AFTER having fulfilled the condition of the three
cups, Sse Yeoupe wished to hear the news concern-
ing Lo Mengli.
Sse Yeoute prolonged for some time the jest,
and then drawing the letter from his aleeve,
said-" Do you think this contains any news of
Mr Lo ?"
Sse Yeoupe seized the letter; and as he ran over
the contents with a glance, joy involuntarily lighted
his countenance. "Mr Lo," said he, " is truly a
man full of sentiment! Brother," added he, " how
did this message fall into your hands?'
"The person who brought it," replied Sse Yeoute,
is a shallow-brained old serving man: the resem-
blance of my name with that of your lordship, led
him to my house; as I thought the letter might con-
tain something to which you attached importance,
and fearing that some other more serious mistake
might happen, I kept it for the purpose of hand-
256
JU-KIAO-LI:
ing it to you, my lord, without knowing in what
light you would view my precaution."
"I am infinitely obliged to you," replied Sse
Yeoupe. " The devotion of a thousand friends
could not recompense such attentions."
" There is no occasion for recompense," said Sse
Yeoute, laughing. "Only take me with you, that
I may be present at the banquet of rejoicing."
The two young men continued to amuse themselves
thus for some time, while drinking a few cups. Sse
Yeoupe then rose to take leave; and after having
quitted his host, he got into his sedan chair, and
resumed his journey. On arriving in the village of
Pechi, at the monastery of Kouanyin, he wished to
pay a visit to Tsingin. When Tsingin saw a cor-
tege of sedan chairs and horses approaching, he
came out in great haste to receive him; and as soon
as Sse Yeoupe perceived him, he cried out, Master,
do you know me ?"
"Ah! it is the lord Sse!" replied Tsingin why
should I not know you ?" He then led him into
the hall of meditations; and after the salutations
had been gone through, Sse Yeoupe told the per-
sons of his suite to bring in the presents.
Tsingin received them with many expressions of
acknowledgment. "My lord Sse," continued he,
"what numberless congratulations I have to make
you! I am a poor religious man, buried in the so-
litude of a village; I was absolutely unacquainted
with all that had happened, and therefore could not
offer you my compliments."
After tea, Tsingin ordered an apartment to be
got ready.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
257
"Do not give yourself any trouble about an
apartment," said Sse Yeoupe. "I come as form-
erly to ask you for shelter, and a bed in one of
your cells."
" My lord Sse," replied Tsingin, " you are
at present a man of distinction. I should fear
that a simple bed of matting would not be fit
for you."
After the conversation had continued for some
time, Sse Yeoupe, addressing his host, said-"Is
the lord Pe Thaîhiouan at present in good health?"
"He is in good health," replied Tsingin. "In
the course of this spring he went on an excursion
of pleasure to the western lake, where he re-
mained two or three months. It is now scarce a
month since he returned."
"Is the young lady his daughter yet married ?"
asked Sse Yeoupe.
"As usual, there has been no lack of proposals,"
replied Tsingin; "but she is not yet married. I
heard it said yesterday, that the lord Pe, during his
stay at Tchekiang, had promised her to some one,
and that the lord Gou had come to speak in favour
of a second suitor; that the two parties being in
opposition, considerable contest had taken place,
but that nothing was yet decided."
"Do you know an inhabitant of the village of
Kinchi, named Hoangfou, master ?" asked Sse
Yeoupe.
Tsingin reflected for a moment. There may
be a thousand inhabitants of the village of Kin-
-chi," replied he. "I go there to beg the rice ne-
cessary for each month's consumption. Every
house is perfectly well known to me; but I have
258
JU-KIAO-LI:
never heard speak of a person of the name of
Hoangfou."
"He told me that he was a relative of Pe Thai-
hiouan," added Sse Yeoupe.
If he be a relation of the lord Pe," observed
Tsingin, "he is probably residing at his country
house. You need only ask at the mansion, and you
will immediately get some account of him."
After supper, Sse Yeoupe begged permission to
retire for the night. The next morning, after rising,
dressing himself, and breakfasting, he ordered his
servants and followers to remain with his sedan
chairs and horses at the convent, whilst he dressed
in the clothes which he formerly wore, and, accom-
panied by Siaohi only, walked leisurely towards the
village of Kinchi. On approaching, and beholding
those hills, and waters, and trees, in the same state
as when he saw them last, he felt unutterable emo-
tion at the thought that nothing was as yet con-
cluded with regard to the marriage.
The peach-tree blossoms, the stream flows as before.
Behold young Lieou, the object of so many wishes, re-
turned :
But is the divinity whom he adores still there ?
Every thought, every recollection, gives him heart-rend-
ing emotion.
While proceeding to the village, Sse Yeoupe
continued occupied by his reflections. "I did not
foresee," thought he, "that these two marriages
were to be discussed in the same village. If I pre-
sent myself to the lord Pe by the name of Sse, I
cannot afterwards call upon Hoangfou. It is better
still to keep my name of Lieou, ask for a private
intercourse with the lord Hoangfou, reveal frankly
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
259
to him the truth, and then repair without delay to
the house of lord Pe."
As soon as he had taken the resolution, he en-
tered the village, and, as he went along, inquired
for the house of Hoangfou. Now Pe, who surmised
that young Lieou might come to ask for him by that
name, had sent some of the servants who had at-
tended him on his journey, to the entrance of the
village, to await the coming of Sse Yeoupe. As
soon as they saw him approach, they hastened for-
ward to meet him, saying, " Is it really you, Mr
Lieou?"
" The same," replied Sse. Yeoupe, very well
pleased to see them. " Is your master at home ?"
" He is, sir, and expects you," replied the ser-
vants, who immediately conducted Sse Yeoupe
into the eastern wing of the house. They made
him sit down, and then hastened to inform the lord
Pe, who was greatly rejoiced, and said, " The
young Lieou is a man of his word."
He ordered a banquet to be prepared, to which
be intended to invite his guest, and then, address
ing doctor Gou, said-" I will first go and re-
ceive him, and afterwards send some one to beg
you to join us."
"All I fear," said the doctor, laughing, is to
find him far beneath what I have heard you say of
him."
Pe replied to this pleasantry : At the first
glance, brother, you will acknowledge that he is
inferior in nothing to young Sse." He then went
to the eastern side of the building. On arriving
there, he fixed his eyes upon the person of Sse
Yeoupe, in order to examine him attentively; and
260
JU-KIAO-LI
beholding the gracefulness of his figure, the
charms of his face, and his light and easy deport-
ment, attributes of youth, he felt his heart swell
with joy, and going up to him with a smiling air,
he said-" How is it that you have not arrived till
now, Mr Lieou? From morning till evening I have
been looking out for you."
Sse Yeoupe hastened to make a low bow. "I
have been detained several days at Hangtcheou by
one of my friends," said he, " which has retarded
the visit I proposed having the honour of paying
you ; I am infinitely culpable."
While speaking thus, they paid each other the
accustomed respects. After which they sat down.
Pe then, addressing his guest, said, "I have seen
by the letter that I have received from you, that
the person whom you supposed dead, is not so,
and that you have been led into an error by a false
report. This is a great subject of joy; but you
have not told me whose daughter that person
is. You also informed me, that a magistrate un-
dertook to be your go-between; who is the ma-
gistrate? And lastly, you had told me that the
lord your father had made the voyage to the
immortals ; how then can you say, that the mar-
riage in question has been concluded by the lord
your father ?"
"Things are now come to that point, that I must
no longer conceal anything from you. I shall now
tell you the whole truth. It is a long time since my
respectable father quitted the world; but last year
a fraternal uncle took me into his house, and adopted
me for his son. The young lady is no other than
the person of whom we spoke some time ago, the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
261
daughter of Pe Thaihiouan. The magistrate who
has undertaken the part of go-between, is the great
historiographer Gou Touian."
These words threw Pe into an extreme surprise.
"I have heard," said he, "that the person for
whom Gou Touian interested himself, was Sse
Yeoupe. Since what period have you given him a
similar commission, Mr Lieou?"
Sse Yeoupe arose, and making a profound obei-
sance before Pe, said-" I am very culpable; my
name is not Lieou I am really Sse Yeoupe him-
self."
This declaration filled Pe with joy and asto-
nishment.
'This is a most extraordinary occurrence," he
exclaimed. Sit down, sir, I beg of you, and
permit me to ask you a question. In the letter of
introduction that had been given you, Mr Sse, it
was mentioned that you had been appointed judge
at- Hangtcheou: how came it to pass that I met
you during my excursion, traversing the country
under a fictitious name?"
"The sole reason," replied Sse Yeoupe, " was,
that the governor Yang had a daughter whom he
wished me to marry. My refusal provoked his re-
sentment, and he took every occasion to annoy
and embarrass me. As I was then under his or-
ders, I knew not how to avoid the effects of his
malice but by sending in my resignation, changing
my name, and escaping the pursuit he had made
after me, by going to Chanyin and the grotto of
the emperor Ju. It was in this manner that I came
to meet your excellency."
"What!" exclaimed Pe, "old Yang still con-
262
JU-KIAO-LI
tinues to exercise his malignity ! But tell me
who gave you intelligence of the death of Pe Thai-
hiouan's daughter?"
" It was Tchangfanjou who had told it to me,"
replied Sse Yeoupe. "The governor, knowing that
my affections were placed upon the daughter of Pe,
had engaged him to tell me that falsehood, for the
purpose of destroying my hopes."
" What an odious thing that one should be the
laughing-stock of such wretches !" cried Pe. "Mr
Sse," added he, smiling," since you have an
old engagement with Pe Thaihiouan, and that
Gou Touian is your go-between, the fate of your
marriage may be compared to a piece of richly
embroidered silk; but upon what ground will you
place me?"
" I was alone, abandoned, poor, a prey to ad-
versity, my appearance had nothing that indicated
a man favoured by fortune, and I had not the sup-
port of any powerful men to interest you in my fa-
your. After the first glance that your excellency
deigned to cast upon me, you overwhelmed me with
benefits by promising to grant me a double union;
I may well say that it was you who accelerated the
approach of happiness towards me. The affection
with which so amiable a conduct has inspired me
will last to my extreme old age, and it is that which
induces me to come here now, and prostrate my-
self at the foot of your staircase, to solicit your
orders. Could I permit myself, after the example
of a despicable world, to obscure by clouds the
light that shines at the gate of a sage, and draw
upon myself the railleries of all those who know
me ?"
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
263
Pe began to laugh. " Mr Sse," said he, you
evince great delicacy, and it must be acknowledged
that you are not one of those men whose senti-
ments are changed by new-made honours; but
what can I do to maintain the discussion? The
best thing I can do, is to give way to Pe Thai-
hiouan."
"Were such an arrangement to take place, you
would give a proof of perfect virtue, and I should
shew myself guilty of great ingratitude. I still
hope that your excellency will find some means to
accommodate matters."
" All that may be settled ; but there is a point in
which I am culpable, and which I ought to make
known to you."
" How can you say so ?" replied Sse Yeoupe.
" Have the kindness to let me know what you
mean."
"My name is not Hoangfou," replied Pe:" I
am, Mr Sse, the Pe Thaîhiouan of whom you have
been speaking."
At these words, Sse Yeoupe was seized with
unutterable astonishment. What " cried he,
"then your excellency was only jesting in what
you said to me during your excursion! I have been
all this time in a dream."
Both, looking at each other, burst into a loud fit
of laughter, and Pe immediately sent to pray the
the lord Gou his brother-in-law to come and join
him.
In a short time, Dr Gou appeared; and when,
instead of young Lieou, he saw Sse Yeoupe
sitting down, he eagerly asked for an explana-
264
JU-KIAO-LI:
tion. " I understood," said he, " that it was
young Lieou who had come to pay you a visit:
how happens it, on the contrary, that I find Mr
Liansian here?"
Sse Yeoupe immediately saluted him, laughed,
and remained silent. Pe, who was also laughing,
said, " You will be told that, when you shall
have performed your salutations."
As soon as the doctor and Sse Yeoupe had ren-
dered to each other the accustomed respects, they
sat down ; and the doctor, being convinced that
there must be some motive for their mirth, insisted
upon knowing it. You wish to see young Lieou,"
replied Pe, still laughing. "There he is !" added
he, pointing to Sse Yeoupe.
" What do you mean?" cried Dr Gou, quite
confounded.
Pe then gave him a detailed account of all
that had previously happened. " What a mul-
tiplicity of cross purposes !" exclaimed Dr Gou,
bursting into a loud laugh. " I told you that I had
never heard speak of young Lieou amongst the
scholars of Kinling. I told you also that amongst
the young men of the empire, there was no one
could surpass Mr Sse, but Mr Sse himself."
Then, turning towards Pe, "Brother," said he, "in
consequence of your not having been deterred by
so many obstacles from making choice of Mr Sse,
and your having entered without the least hesita-
tion into a marriage engagement with him, it
may be said that you have the eye of a magistrate.
Such a proof of discernment inspires me with great
respect."
" It is not in this instance that I have dis-
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
265
played it," said Pe, laughing. "But the opinion I
had of his merit, was communicated to me by your-
self, my dear brother."
" How can the reed and the rush," said Sse
Yeoupe, "have any charms for your lordships, ac-
customed as you are to reflect the images of the
most elegant plants?"
The pleasure which they enjoyed in conversing
together was not to be exhausted. In a short
time the servants brought in the collation. All
three took their places to do it honour; and as this
time Sse Yeoupe was to fill the place of son and
and son-in-law, he put himself at the end of the
table, which was cross-ways. The conversation
was carried on gaily, animated by feelings of real
satisfaction.
They remained at table the half of the day and
when the collation was over, one of the servants
took it away.
Pe and his two guests quitted the table, and re-
sumed their conversation. After some time, Sse
Yeoupe, choosing a favourable moment, said to Pe,
Your son-in-law has still something to communi-
cate to you."
Upon what subject ?" asked Pe.
"I received yesterday, by chance, some intelli-
gence of the person who I told you a little while
back was obliged to fly from persecution. I
have discovered a clue that will guide me to her."
"And according to that clue, where may she
be?" asked Pe.
" What I have been told is very singular," re-
plied Sse Yeoupe. "I have been assured, my dear
266
JU-KIAO-LI:
father-in-law, that I shall hear of her, if I make
inquiries in your mansion."
"That is no doubt very singular," observed Pe,
laughing. " Why should they tell you to apply to
me for information? To what family in Kiangnan
does she belong?"
She is not from Kiangnan, but from Chantoung,
and of the house of Lo," replied Sse Yeoupe.
"I knew in Chantoung a certain Lo Yihoung,
but he has been dead a long time. His son is still
very young. How could you have made any ac-
quaintance in the house of a widow woman, Mr
Sse? And who has been able to act as go-between
for you?"
Last year," replied Sse Yeoupe, " I passed
through Chantoung on my way to court. Having
been stopped and plundered by robbers, I found
myself in a very embarrassing situation, being un-
able to continue my journey, or return home.
Chance brought me acquainted with a certain
counsellor Li, who asked me to write some verses
for him, he promising to supply me with money to
continue my journey. He in consequence invited
me to his residence. The house of Li happened to be
contiguous to that of Lo; and as I was walking be-
fore the back garden gate, young Lo came by
chance to walk in the same place. We met; a
mutual interchange of sentiments ensued, and we
were soon intimately acquainted. He furnished
me with the expenses of my journey, and at the
same time told me that he had a younger sister
with whom he promised to make me tie the knot of
silk."
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
267
"Tell me, Mr Sse, what age was this young son
of the house of Lo?' asked Pe. "What kind of
a looking person was he ?"
"The young man," replied Sse Yeoupe, " was
sixteen years of age last year. He is now seven-
teen : his face is charming, and full of delicacy ;
his complexion is as brilliant as the tree of jasper
agitated by the breath of the breeze. When we
stood opposite each other, his countenance exhaled
the modesty that animated his bosom."
" When you quitted the capital, and returned
through Chantoung, did you again meet him, sir?"
asked Pe.
I hoped to have seen him in passing through
Chantoung on my return from the capital. Unfor-
tunately, the front and back gates of Lo's house
were closely shut and sealed, and there was no one
in the interior. I made various inquiries of
counsellor Li; but all he could tell me was, that
the family, which was composed of a widow, a
young girl, and a little boy five or six years old,
being menaced with persecution, had gone to Kiang-
nan; that moreover there was no young man of
the age of sixteen or seventeen belonging to the fa-
mily. I also questioned a certain Tsian Hiaolian,
who assured me of the same thing; so that for some
time it appeared to me that I had been in a dream,
not being otherwise able to account for such an
illusion. But yesterday, at the house of one of
my friends, I found by chance a letter from Mr
Lo. I have begun again to believe in his exist-
ence, and to be convinced that the previous in-
formation given me was not conformable to truth.
However, in this letter, he merely tells me to make
268
JU-KIAO-LI:
inquiries about him at your mansion. What does
this recommendation mean?"
" What is this young Lo's surname ?" asked
Pe.
" His sirname is Mengli," replied Sse Yeoupe.
"
He must have had some motive for telling you
to inquire about him at my house," said Pe. " With
your permission, we shall return to this subject
another time."
You came here on foot, Mr Sse," said doctor
Gou. " Where did you leave your chairs and
horses?"
Some distance from this, at the convent of
Kouanyin in the village of Pechi," replied Sse
Yeoupe. "I used formerly to lodge there."
" That convent is too distant," said Pe. " Why
do you not bring them here? It would be then
more easy for us to meet and converse morning and
evening :" and he immediately ordered his ser-
vants to go for Sse Yeoupe's baggage. Towards
the approach of night, another collation was
brought in. All three re-commenced talking more
briskly than before, and drinking with fresh ar-
dour, till the second watch *, , when they sepa-
rated. Sse Yeoupe remained in the oriental wing of
the building where he bad been received, and Pe
and the doctor returned to their apartments; the
doctor went to sleep in the pavilion of rural
dreams, and Pe entered the inner apartment, where
the effects of the banquet soon put him to sleep.
The next morning, after he had got up and
dressed, he told Yansou to acquaint her young
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
269
mistress that he wished to speak to her. Miss Pe
had the evening before learned that young Lieou
was no other than young Sse, with which intelligence
she and Miss Lo had been enraptured. She ac-
cordingly obeyed with great alacrity the orders of
her father. On seeing her approach, Pe began
to laugh. " Well," said he, " young Lieou is
young Sse. Your uncle made no mistake in bè-
coming his go-between; nor was your father mis-
taken in the choice he made of a son-in-law.
There was no error when he was put at the head of
the list, when he was distinguished at the exami-
nation, and when he was appointed to an office.
You see that upon all occasions they who have real
merit receive the recompense."
"It is then the same person ?" said Miss Pe.
" Who could have foreseen so many cross pur-
poses ! What a deal of trouble all this has caused
you, father ! "
All this is now of no consequence," said Pe ;
but here is another question:" and he told her
what he had heard from Sse Yeoupe with regard
to his adventure in the Lo. family. It is clear,"
said he, " that it was my niece with whom he had
this adventure ; for who could the young man be
whom he saw ?"
"My sister Mengli had already informed me of
this affair," said Miss Pe. "Her father was no
more, her brother was only an infant, her mother
led the retired life of a widow, and had no means
of choosing a son-in-law. She was afraid that
she should die without finding a husband. She
therefore resolved to take advantage of a circum-
stance : she put on male attire, and contrived to
270
JU-KIAO-LI:
have an interview with the young Mr Sse. She
gave him gold, and entered into an engagement
with him. All this is the exact truth and now,
father, I earnestly hope that you will do the rest
for her."
Pe was extremely satisfied with what he now
heard. "Still, so young," said he, " I should not
have imagined that she could have displayed so
much address. My first project was to give you
both in marriage to young Lieou : now you will both
marry young Sse that comes to the same thing.
It is easy to see that his wishes are in accordance
with our desires; both the one and the other shall
be satisfied, and that will be bringing matters to an
extremely happy issue. I see no objection to
it. You may acquaint her with it; but you must
not say a word of all this before your aunt."
Miss Pe undertook the commission of her father,
while he and Dr Gou went to the eastern side
of the building. After a triple salutation, Pe, ad-
dressing Sse Yeoupe, said, "I have made very
minute inquiries with regard to what you yesterday
confided to me about Lo Mengli; such a person
does, in fact, exist."
Sse Yeoupe, delighted by this assurance, asked-
"And where is my brother Lo ? Can I not see
him?"
"The place into which Lo Mengli has retired,
does not permit him at present to have an inter-
view with you," replied Pe. "But I have it in
my power, if you are so inclined, to give you his
sister in marriage."
" I am not," said Sse Yeoupe, " one of those
who, as soon as they have reached the land of
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
271
Loung, turn their eyes towards Chou. I have ob-
tained the object of my wishes, and I have nothing
further to desire but I was poor, stripped of every-
thing upon a high road, reduced to the extremity
of distress, when, at the first word, and after having
seen me only in profile, Lo Mengli came to my aid.
His generosity supplied my wants by offering me
thirty ounces of silver, and adding to this loan
the gift of bracelets and pearls; besides this, he
engaged that this marriage should take place; he
shewed the warmest and tenderest affection : he
could not have treated me better, had I been one
of the sages of antiquity. Now that fortune has
given me rank, if I should break off my previous
engagements, I should be like the dog who, after
gnawing the bones, abandons them."
"That is impossible! that cannot be!" cried Dr
Gou. But it may be said, that Mengli knew
how to judge of men, and make good use of his
generosity."
" It is right to recompence him for it," said Pe.
" We shall with pleasure witness the fulfilment of
his engagement. But I fear we cannot do as much
for this niece of mine, whom I promised to you
some time ago. It is not permitted to have three
wives in the same house."
"Mengli is an amiable scholar, father-in-law,"
said Sse Yeoupe. "Why would you not give him
your niece in marriage."
" We shall speak of that hereafter," said Pe.
The conversation continued in this tone, and in
the course of it mention was made of the exchange
of verses upon the vernal willows, practised by
272
JU-KIAO-LI:
Tchangfanjou, and of the knavery of Sse Yeoute,
when he presented himself with a letter under the
name of another. These two adventures produced
considerable laughter. "Now that I am honoured
with your affection," said Sse Yeoupe, " and that
all these important affairs are concluded, let us
forget these trifling incidents of the past time.
Besides, these two men are old acquaintances :
and I hope that you will deign to receive them as
before, and show thereby that you know how to
pardon."
" Your idea agrees perfectly with my own senti-
ments," replied Pe ; and immediately he told a
servant to take two visiting cards; to carry one to
Mr Tchangfanjou, and the other to Mr Sse Yeoute;
to tell them that the lord Sse was at the house,
and to invite them to come and seat themselves by
him. Shortly after, they both came, one after the
other; their conduct was very respectful, and the
entire company remained in the oriental wing of
the building, diverting themselves.
In the mean time the inspector-general Sse, on
his return to take the orders of the court, learned
the restoration of Sse Yeoupe to the degree of
doctor of the grand academy, at which he was ex-
tremely rejoiced.
He saw now that he had a successor in the
following generation; and as he himself took no
pleasure in exercising the functions of a magistrate,
he wrote a memorial in which he pretended illness.
At the same time he stated his regret to the cham-
ber of inspectors-general, and after reiterated en-
treaties, he procured his name to be withdrawn
from the list of disposable inspectors until the
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
273
period of his recovery, when he should be able to
resume his functions.
When Sse obtained the decree, he left the capital
without delay, and first went to his own house in
the province of Honan, where he remained a month.
He afterwards set out for Kinling, in order to con-
clude Sse Yeoupe's marriage. As soon as the news
of his arrival reached the village of Kinchi, Sse
Yeoupe hastened to take leave of Pe and Dr Gou,
and went to receive his father at Kinling, in the
house which he had formerly inhabited. It was the
very same day that the inspector-general Sse
arrived. The father and son were greatly rejoiced
to see each other. It was not long before Sse in-
quired in what stage was the intended marriage.
Sse Yeoupe then related to him the proposals that
governor Yang had made to him ; how, having
changed his name, he had met Hoangfou; how on
his return every thing had been cleared up; and
concluded by recounting his adventure with Lo
Mengli, from beginning to end. The inspector-
general listened with great satisfaction to all these
circumstances. " What astonishing events and
strange incidents are there in the affairs of this
world!" he exclaimed. Another day we shall re-
sume this agreeable conversation."
The magistrates of the city and of the neighbour-
ing districts, having heard of his arrival, came to
pay him their respects. The invitations followed:
and banquets and importunate politenesses of all
species, left them not a moment of repose. In a
conversation which the inspector-general Sse and
Sse Yeoupe had upon this subject, the former said-
ss The noise and dissipation of the city render it
274
JU-KIAO-LI.
insupportable; let us go and seek for a residence
in the village of Kinchi. We shall become neigh-
bours of the lord Pe, and you will be more con-
veniently placed for the prosecution of your marriage.
In the next place, Pe has no small children: you
will be his stay and support, and you will prevent
him from feeling the sadness of solitude and aban-
donment. In fine, the tranquil life of a village, with
the prospect of hills and waters, and the society of
the lord Pe, will have charms to beguile my old age."
" My lord," replied Sse Yeoupe, " your idea
appears to me an excellent one." And, in fact, the
next morning the father and son went to the village
of Kinchi. After the salutations addressed to them
by Pe, Dr Gou, Tchangfanjou, and Sse Yeoute,
the inspector-general Sse made known to Pe the
design he had to fix his residence at Kinchi. Pe
was charmed with the idea, and immediately sent
to inquire for a large mansion in the village, for
the acquisition of which he advised the inspector-
general Sse to pay a thousand pieces of gold. In
a short time Sse fixed his dwelling there.
Preparations were then made for the grand ban-
quet. Dr Gou was prevailed upon to undertake
the direction of the nuptials. Tchangfanjou under-
took the part of go-between with regard to Miss
Pe, and Sse Yeoute performed the same function
with regard to Miss Lo. A fortunate day was fixed
upon, and a double display of nuptial presents
were prepared, and sent at the same time to Pe's
house Pe retained one collection for himself, and
had the other conveyed to Mrs Lo, who accepted
them. A great number of persons were invited to
the feast, and the joy of all parties was at its acmé.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
275
After the ceremony of the nuptial presents, the
inspector-general chose another day, and one of the
most fortunate, to celebrate the marriage. Sse
Yeoupe was then twenty-one years of age. His
very recent admission amongst the body of acade-
micians, his graceful appearance, his well-known
talents, raised him above all other men. Every one
repeated his praises, and shewed him marks of
affection. Miss Pe was eighteen years of age, and
Miss Lo seventeen. Renown had already spread
far and wide the talents, the virtues, and graces, of
these two charming girls.
When the day of the wedding arrived, the
inspector-general Sse had preparations made for a
grand banquet of ceremony. Two large bamboo
chairs with embroidered ornaments had been con-
structed, and painted lanterns were placed all along
the road at both sides. Drums and musical instru-
ments resounded without interruption. Sse Yeoupe,
mounted upon a superb horse which proudly
threw up his head, appeared with a black gauze
cap upon his head, buskins of the same colour upon
his feet, and around his neck a large purple scarf.
The officers of the grand academical college, and of
the chamber of inspectors-general, accompanied
him, ranged in a double file. He advanced in this
manner to meet his wives. Along the whole of the
way fireworks were played off, the sound of which
re-echoed to the sky. Tumult and joy attained
their utmost pitch.
The two young ladies, clothed in golden stuffs
with ornaments of precious stones, appeared to be
the daughters of the king of the immortals. They
respectfully took leave of the lord Pe and Mrs Lo,
276
JU-KIAO-LI.
and mounted into the chair, their faces bathed in
tears. Pe on account of the intimacy did not
observe the vulgar custom. Clothed in a festal
garment of the second order, he ascended a chair
carried by four bearers, and accompanied by the
officers belonging to his department, came himself
to be present at the ceremony. Dr Gou, also
clothed in festal garments, was carried in a large
chair. Tchangfanjou and Sse Yeoute, wearing
caps, dressed in blue, and mounted upon prancing
horses whose heads were decked with flowers and
scarlet streamers, were the two marshals of the
procession, which upon this occasion was as
brilliant as if it were for the reception of a doctor.
The ringing of bells, and the sound of drums, were joined
to the harmony of the lute and the guitars.
A perfect union spread joy amongst all the spectators.
The niece to whom they had given shelter doubled the
charms of such an alliance.
The sparrow hangs his nest to the branches of two
trees ;
The moon remains suspended over the scarlet tissues that
adorn the windows of the pavilion.
Before the door a gilded victim replaces the seductive
flowers.
The immortal who has attained the object of his desires
tastes a new joy.
These are not the songs of the book of verses: it is the
melody of the great Chun.
In a little time the chairs arrived before the gate.
Those who were in them descended, and entered
the saloon of the principal body of the building.
Sse Yeoupe stood in the middle, having the two
brides, one on his left, the other on his right; and
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
277
in this position made his salutation to the inspector-
general Sse, and to his other relations. This cere-
mony being concluded, the musicians entered the
apartment of the women. The inspector-general
Sse remained without, in the company of the lord
Pe, Dr Gou, Tchangfanjou, and Sse Yeoute. Three
tables were laid out in the hall for the banquet.
Sse Yeoupe dined with the two brides. He threw
a stolen glance under the perfumed tapers upon
Miss Pe, upon that beauty really capable of attract-
ing the fish from the bottom of the abysses, bringing
down the crane from the heights of heaven, eclipsing
the light of the moon, of making the flowers blush ;
and of which it might be said, that there was nothing
exaggerated in the reputation it had. This sight
threw him into a perfect rapture. He afterwards
directed his looks to Miss Lo; and, struck with the
extreme resemblance that he found in her to Lo
Mengli, he could not help asking himself with
astonishment if it were possible for a sister to be so
very like a brother. The troop of handmaids who
stood around them, did not permit him to open the
conversation; and he was obliged to confine to his
own breast the joyful emotions with which he felt
himself transported, until the moment when the
company separated, and each one was at liberty to
retire to his own apartment.
In the interior court there were two pavilions,
surmounted by a single story, and placed opposite
each other to the left and right. The pavilion on
the left was destined for Miss Pe, that on the right
belonged to Miss Lo. Sse Yeoupe went first to
Miss Pe's apartment, and in a conversation which
for them was full of charms, they recalled to mind
278
JU-KIAO-LI:
the origin of their mutual passion, the verses upon
the vernal willows, and the two pieces of poetry
upon the farewell to the crane and the welcome of
the swallow. Miss Pe did not affect the airs of an
inmate of the inner apartment, but her answer con-
stantly-shewed the union that existed between their
sentiments.
After this interview Sse Yeoupe passed to the
apartment of Miss Lo. Where is your eldest
brother Mengli now?" he asked her.
"I have no eldest brother : Mengli is the name of
your humble servant," replied she.
Sse Yeoupe, very much astonished, again asked
her, 'Were you the person, madam, whom I for-
merly met near the rock ?"
" Be good enough to ascertain that yourself,
sir," she answered, smiling : " I cannot tell you."
sb Here is," cried Sse Yeoupe, bursting into a
laugh, a dream of six months dissipated in a day.
I had, it is true, before this some suspicion of the
truth: for I thought it impossible that the world
could contain so charming a young man."
After this conversation, Sse Yeoupe returned to
Miss Pe, to whom he related the discovery he had
made, which amused them for some time. Then, as
Miss Pe was a year older than her cousin, it was in
her pavilion that Sse Yeoupe remained this first
night of the marriage. A poet full of ardour, and a
charming woman animated with reciprocal tender-
ness, must have enjoyed with transport the happi-
ness of being together.
The following day Sse Yeoupe went to the lord
Pe, to make him the customary acknowledgments.
All the company passed the whole day in feasting.
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
279
On his return, Sse Yeoupe ordered a collation to be
served up to himself and the two brides. He showed
to Miss Lo the verses upon the vernal willows, which
he had formerly composed to prescribed rhymes,
the farewell to the crane' and the welcome of the
swallow.' These pieces of poetry were again relished
and admired. Afterwards Sse Yeoupe shewed Miss
Pe the golden bracelets and pearl necklace which
Miss Lo had lent to him. "I did not foresee," said
the latter, " that that first movement of tenderness
would have become the foundation of a felicity that
must last all my life."
It was in the apartment of Miss Lo that Sse
Yeoupe passed the second night. It was upon the
pillow that she related to him the particulars of
her adventure, when she had quitted the dress of
her sex. This account augmented still more Sse
Yeoupe's tenderness.
From this moment, the reciprocal esteem and
affection with which Sse Yeoupe and his two wives
were animated, continued constantly to increase.
The most perfect harmony reigned between them.
Sse Yeoupe, who preserved a grateful recollection
of the good offices Yansou had rendered him, spoke
to bis wives on the subject, and took her into his
service.
The inspector-general Sse felt no inclination to
resume his functions : he preferred passing the
evening of his days in the society of Pe. Some
time afterwards he disposed of his possessions in
the province of Honan, and transferred his establish-
ment to Kinling.
Dr Gou did not resign his situation. The
functions which he had to perform as an acade-
280
JU-KIAO-LI :
mician, occupied him but a few days, and left him
a good deal of leisure. This time he passed in
amusing himself with his two friends. When
governor Yang learned how matters had turned out,
he sent, by express, presents and felicitations. After
some time, Sse Yeoupe was obliged to go to court,
to fulfil the duties of his office but he remained
there only a month or two, for the recollection of
his two wives soon obliged him to solicit permission
to return. As his road lay through the province
of Chantoung, he profited of the circumstance to
put in order the domestic concerns of Mrs Lo.
They waited till the son had grown up, to give him
the management of them. At this period the licen-
tiate Tsian had just been appointed sub-prefect,
and had set out to enter upon the duties of his office.
Counsellor Li was still in his former house, and
invited Sse Yeoupe to dine with him twice.
After his return home, Sse Yeoupe never indulged
in any other recreations than composing in verse or
prose with his two wives. He never thought of
quitting the house. At the examination which
followed, he had the direction of one of the sections
and on another occasion he presided at the exami-
nation of the province of Tchekiang, and collected
round him a great number of disciples. He was
afterwards named superintendent of the department
of literary affairs; and as he had no taste for magis-
terial functions, he did not return to the court.
Tchangfanjou and Sse Yeoute made use of his
credit to obtain by purchase literary titles. The
first was named commissary adjunct, and the
second secretary in an office.
The lord Pe found in the inspector-general Sse
OR, THE TWO COUSINS.
281
a companion to his taste ; besides, he saw con-
tinually Sse Yeoupe and his two wives : he there-
fore could know nothing of the ennui of solitude.
In course of time young Mrs Pe brought into the
world two sons, and Mrs Lo gave birth to one; and
as about this time Yinglang died, Sse Yeoupe offered
Pe his second son to replace him. These three
young boys became in their turn distinguished
scholars at the examinations.
Whatever crosses Sse Yeoupe might have suffered
on account of his double marriage, the manner in
which the matter terminated had well recompensed
them. He enjoyed during thirty or forty years,
with his two wives, all the happiness that love can
afford. Is not this narrative worthy of figuring
amongst the beautitul histories which have come
down to us from antiquity
The following verses were written in praise of the
lord Pe.
Just and incapable of fear, his mission to the Tartars
proved his courageous devotion
Wine and poetry formed the amusement of his life
Smiling reason, a taste for music and books, never quitted
him ;
Such a man is a brilliant embroidery upon the summit
of a peak.
Some verses were also consecrated to the particular
praise of Sse Yeoupe.
His youth, his talent, make him resemble the blue
nenuphar of the most celebrated of poets.
Without caring about destiny-he attached himself only
to an accomplished fair one.
His strength and his life will probably be exhausted
But heaven, in its mercy, has gifted him with two
charming wives.
282
JU-KIAO-LI.
Here follow the verses that celebrated the virtues
of Miss Pe.
From the depth of the women's pavilion she made her
love for talent shine out;
Verses and poetry were the go-betweens for her marriage.
Let it not be said that in quitting the paternal mansion
she has carried away with her the snow sparkling
with whiteness ;
This other wonder, the vernal willows, will render
illustrious the house of Pe.
There were also some composed in praise of
Miss Lo.
Her piercing eye from the top of a pavilion discovered
all the merit of a man;
It was to the present which she offered him, that she
confided the care of her whole life's happiness.
Never did a more beautiful face thus shew itself amongst
the flowers.
Talent and generosity were united to form her heart.
SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES,
SUPPLIED BY
J. H. PICKFORD, Esq.,
Member of the Asiatic Society of Paris.
Page 1, last line but one, "silver."
About £6 5s.
Page 2, line 27, " fortunate day."
Vide previous note, Vol. I.
Page 4, first word, 'money."
In the text, literally five-tenths; a tenth is a small copper
coin worth 71d., and is the tenth of an ounce.
Page 5, line 6, "silver."
£31 5s.
Note. Page 6, last line.
The Chinese are the most ceremonious people in the
world; there is nothing for which they have so high a vene-
ration as for their rites and ceremonies, these being, accord-
ing to Du Halde, rather so many laws, than fashions intro-
duced by custom. One of their books contains three thou-
sand rules of politeness, to watch over the due performance
of which a tribunal of rites is established, which will not even
exempt foreign ambassadors from their observance.
284
NOTES.
Page 19, line 7, " miles from this."
About five English miles.
Page 31, line 24, "master of the house."
Literally in the Chinese text, guestly and masterly.
Page 52, line 5, "silrer."
About £37 10s.
Page 55, note, (erratum
Scarcely three English miles.
Page 61, fourth line from the bottom, "ounces."
£6 58. or £9 78. 6d.
Page 69, seventh line from the bottom, is Mourre."
The Tsae mei, the game at which the fair divines are here
represented as playing, is a very universal one, and appears to
exist in almost every nation. It is the Morra of the Italians,
the Munke of the Germans, and the Mourre of the French.
It is also met with in Spain, and is well known in Greece;
indeed, a celebrated modern Greek poet, Solomos of Zante,
has made an allusion to it in one of his compositions. It is
played in Scotland and also in Ireland, and is not, I believe,
wholly unknown in our own country, though less so than
in those above named; on which account I shall endeavour
to give an idea of the manner in which it is played and in
what it consists.
The Mourre of the French may be considered as two dis-
tinct games, the one (micatio digitorum) consists in one of
the parties quickly holding up one or more of his fingers,
NOTES.
285
and calling out a higher number than those make which he
holds up; the other party must instantly, and without con-
sideration, hold up as many of his, the number of which added
to that indicated by the fingers of his opponent, will amount
to the number called by the latter: thus, if the one hold up
two and call out fire, the second must instantly hold up three
of his to complete the number named in the event of an
error, the party failing has to pay a fine. This game is very
common in the south of France and in Italy, where men and
women may be repeatedly seen playing at it.
The other division of the Mourre is that played by young
girls on the petals of flowers when seeking for sweethearts,
and it is at this game the fair Chinese are supposed to be
playing. A margaret or chrysanthemam is the flower usually
selected: the little one begins by plucking off one of the
petals, saying at the same time, Il m'aime un peu: for the
second, beaucoup: for the third, passionnément, and for the
fourth, pas du tout. She then commences again with the
same words and in the same order, until she arrives at the
last petal, and according as the corresponding word happens
to be, much or little, &c., so is she beloved by the object of
her researches. The Morra of the Italians and Munke of
the Germans correspond exactly to both these different
games. In Greece, the latter seems to be chiefly known,
though I have met with some Greeks who were not wholly
unacquainted with the former. The Spanish girls have also
a mode of divining with grapes after the same manner. In
Germany the young ladies pnrsue-their investigations some-
what farther than their fair neighbours the French: plack-
ing the petals in the same way, they pronounce the words,
Edelmann, Bettelmann, Pfaff, Soldat, Student, (nohleman,
beggur, parson, soldier, student,) thus learning the quality of
their lover; they then take another of the same kind of
flowers, and repeat the following words, plucking off a petal
for each: Er libet mich von Hertzen-mit Schmertzen-
286
NOTES.
klein wenig-nein gar nicht. (He loves me with his heart-
with smarts-very little-not at all.) Sometimes, however,
they only repeat the words, he loves me, be loves me not, in
succession, and indeed Goëthe, in his original and extraor-
dinary composition, Faust, makes Margaret pluck an aster
when in the garden with Faust, and repeat these words to see
if she be loved by him. The Grecian ladies chiefly employ
the latter words, but repeat their operations ou three flowers;
it therefore results that they must have the same word twice
out of thrice, and this of course is very decisive.
The Chinese, it appears, are acquainted with both these
games, the one with the flowers and that with the fingers :
the latter is much used by the Manderins they may be seen
sitting together amusing themselves playing at it, and not
unfrequently, in the absence of others, with their servants.
In Italy, France, and Germany, the micatio digitorum, how-
ever, is confined exclusively to the vulgar.
Note. Page 70, " Chinese ink."
I have seen in a Chinese Encyclopdia a minute and in-
teresting detail of the manner of preparing their ink through
all its stages: that is considered the best which is procured
by burning old pines in a furnace, divided into three com-
partments or chambers of this the coarser sort is employed
in making printer's ink, whilst the finer kind, being mixed
with musk, camphor, and other perfumes, to correct any un-
pleasant odour it may have, is formed into the consistence of
paste, with a size obtained from the hide of animals, chiefly,
however, from that of the ass, and put into wooden moulds
of the desired forms. The Chinese author gives us two
modes of ascertaining its purity-the one is to mix a small
portion with a moderate quantity of water : if it fall to the
bottom of the glass, it is coarse and not good; if, on the
contrary, it swim on the surface of the water, or remain sus-
NOTES.
287
pended in it, it is of the finer kind and of a superior quality.
The other mode is to strike it smartly with a hammer; if it
be brittle, and break readily into many pieces, and the
fracture be shining, it is good but if it be not frangible, and
if the fracture instead of shining be dall, it is of an inferior
kind, and probably adulterated. Lamp black is also ob-
tained from olive oil, but is not so much esteemed as that
procured from pines. An active man, says our author, may
attend to two hundred lamps, his business being to brush off
the lamp black from a sheet of metal suspended over the
lamp upon which it is collected. The same writer finishes
the article by saying good ink is a valuable remedy for
burns, and mitigates the pain instantaneously. He recom-
mends it to be rubbed up with water to the consistence of
cream, and smeared on the burned part with a brush 3 this
is to be very frequently repeated, and then allowed to dry
and remain on for some hours.
Page 88, sixth line from the bottom, " thirty ounces."
£9 7s. 6d.
Page 103, fourth line from the bottom, " the judge passed by.'
Failing to shew this mark of respect would infallibly have
subjected him to several blows of the bamboo from the judges,
officers, or lictors, by whom mandarins are always accom-
panied when they go out.
Page 105, line 12, " miles."
Eight and half, or eleven and half English miles.
Page 105, line 17" miles."
About two miles.
288
NOTES.
Page 106, line 3, " hanging down."
Children of both sexes up to the age of fifteen, allow their
hair to grow and wear it naturally, but after this period the
boys shave all off except a little lock behind, which they
either plait and make into a long queue, or tuck up under
their caps: this custom was introduced by the Tartars at
the conquest; prior to which period, they did not shave their
heads, but rolled their hair up in a bunch upon the crown of
the head. We are told that the head-dress of the women
usually consists of several curls, interspersed with little tufts
of gold and silver flowers some deck their heads with the
figure of the fong-wang, phanix. The young ladies commonly
wear a kind of crown made of paste-board (covered with a
beautiful silk), of which the forepart rises in a point above
the forebead, and is covered with jewels, &c., but on the top
of the head, with natural and artificial flowers.
Page 113, third line from the bottom, " black scarf."
The sign of a doctor's degree.
Page 116, line 8, "ancestors."
A custom observed by the Chinese youth on obtaining their
degrees, to thank their relations for the care they have be-
stowed on their education, and to invoke the blessings of
the irancestors on their future undertakings.
Page 175, line 13, " clasp."
Vide previous note to page 106, line 3.
Page 188, line 25, "black gauze."
The sign of doctor's degree, as has been previously seen.
NOTES.
289
Page 190, line 8, " mile."
Rather more than the quarter of an English mile.
Page 192, line 3, " forty miles."
Eleven and half miles.
Page 198, third line from the bottom, "silver."
Three shillings and three halfpence.
Page 204, line 4, " miles."
Seventeen or twenty miles.
Page 251, line 7 from the bottom, "politeness."
It is customary in China to dismount or alight on meeting
superiors or equals, or even persons of an inferior rank, to
whom they are anxious to shew great respect
Page 275, line 17, " painted lanterns."
The lanterns employed on these occasions are of a very
splendid description and of a proportionate size, some being
at least five feet square. Père le Compte, however, says,
one may eat, drink, sleep, receive visits, act plays, and
dance, in those nsed at festivals, which are from twenty-five
to thirty feet in diameter. These lanterns are beautifully
carved and gilt, and consist of several panes of fine silk, ren-
dered transparent by means of a thin varnish, on which are
painted all kinds of grotesque figures, ships, borses, &c.
Instead of silk, some employ a blue transparent horn, the
effect of which is very pleasing. From the top and corners
hang long rich streamers. Once a year, a feast of lanterns
is celebrated throughout the empire, when every house is
VOL. II.
o
290
NOTES.
illuminated with those of the most expensive and beautiful
kind: to add to the singular effect of this scene, the most
curious and brilliant fire-works (in which the Chinese far
surpass every other nation, the use of gunpowder having
been known to them from time immemorial) are discharged
in every direction. The Mandarins and their relations
always have lanterns carried before them at night, on which
are written in large characters the title and quality of the
Mandarin, with the order of his Mandarinate.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES,
14, Charing-Cruss.
4
:
This book should be returned to
the Library on or before the last date
stamped below.
A fine is incurred by retaining it
beyond the specified time.
Please return promptly.
43337373
MAY 29 1964 H
JAN 11 74 H
26s,
77
1437411
WNET
4
WIDENER
NOV 03 2006
OCT 24 2006
1973 H
CANC
BOOK
DUE
FD
463179
New '74 H JUL 2 5 2007
18,8 15th
WIDENER
WIDENER
CANUL 26 2007
